I have owned this laptop for over three years and it has been an ok laptop.  It is not the best in terms of quality and performance.  For the price it has I can't complain because I wouldn't have been able to afford a laptop otherwise.     The joint for the monitor cracked shortly after buying the laptop and I have had to be careful with it.  I finally used epoxy to try an make the joint stronger. 
best in terms of quality ,
 I fly once or twice a week and I've driven over 100,000 miles this year alone, and this laptop goes with me everywhere I go.  The built-in wireless card is excellent at picking up distant hot-spots and its light weight and compact size make it a breeze to carry.  I bought the extended life battery from Dell, and I have to point out that this is a must for the unit.  The original battery has a rather short life, while the extended life battery will power the computer for over 5 hours.  I do carry the original battery with me as well, because it makes for a good backup in a pinch.  As far as durability is concerned, I'm not gentle with my electronic equipment and I have never had a single malfunction with the unit. 
compact size ,light weight ,built-in wireless card ,extended life battery from Dell ,extended life battery ,
 When you first get the computer you can choose whether to use Windows XP or Vista.  I chose Vista with this one and despite all the gripe i have heard about it, i like it and would use it again.  the memory and storage along with the size is the reason i chose this laptop.  Sony also is a very good brand and i have used several before and never had any trouble.  I also like the memory card slots, they support many different ones. 
is a very good brand ,
  It's also one of the few laptops I've used that actually recovers from  Windows 98SE Hibernation properly, without something going wrong.     Upgrade the CDROM drive to either a DVD or DVD/CDRW or DVD RW drive and you'll have quite a decent entertainment PC as well.   Plays DVDs quite well, with minimal jerking, thanks to the decoding built into the display and DMA support for the drives.   There's only one extra memory slot that'll support to 128Mb RAM, making the total to 192Mb available. 
extra memory slot ,
I've just about tried them all.   I recently returned the MSI X Slim 340 because of the touchpad.   I should have listened to the reviewers prior to buying it.   I stumbled upon this laptop in a locally owned computer store and decided to give it a try.   This laptop is perfect.   Weight, screen size, battery life, speed, optical drive (this unit comes stripped down without one as well). 
laptop is perfect ,optical drive ,
This is an excellent product.  This Toshiba Satellite is one of Toshiba's high end laptops.  I purchased mine over eight months ago and it has never given me any problems.  I purchased mine at Best Buy and I got a great price for it.  This laptop has a Core i7 Processor which means that it is supper fast. 
high end laptops ,
 This is a very sturdy laptop, and read to this amazing story:        "I was on my way home when it was raining terribly          hard.        There was a construcution site just up the road from      my house, and they had forgot to put the drainage gates      up.  Funny      thing is, it was on when it got flooded. "    Yes, it is a true story, every word of it, and www. 
is a very sturdy laptop ,amazing story ,
For the money you get great quaility, a good working laptop that is light weight and looks great.  It is an AWESOME laptop. 
is light weight ,good working laptop ,
About a year ago, I got my Compaq Presario 1200 Laptop, and it's been nothing but good times since.  Although the black color is drab, I managed to fancy it up with an oil crayon.   I like the thin monitor and touchpad.  Plenty find it tedious, but I find it to be a lot more accurate than a typical push-mouse.  And I was fascinated with the "touch-tapping" when I first used it.   It's basically your larger computer in a little black package. 
like the thin monitor ,little black package ,
    It burns all the CDs I need.   It handles Microsoft Office flawlessly, even the large Powerpoint presentations they give us.   DVD Movies are played without a hitch.         A few months later, I added an additional 512 of RAM, and this baby has been flying and handling everything I throw at it.       That's about it.  Feel free to get in touch with me if you have any other questions. 
large Powerpoint presentations ,
 You will have software problems with this computer.  Tech support treats customers as if they're incompetent with using a computer in any manner.  They do not care to help you or find other solutions.  Replacement of the computer is not an option only to spend more money to fix it or not get it fixed at all.  Better off buying a computer where the company is will to work with you in replacement if it's found defective with good decent tech support. 
good decent tech support ,
  I don't personally use the play functions keys a lot - and the volume and brightness are easy enough to control.     The only big downside to this laptop is the battery life.   It is horrible.   My battery lasts maybe an hour, without wifi.   Maybe 40 minutes with. 
brightness are easy enough ,
I was excited when I got my first lap top and I'll admit, I didn't have much use for it since I was only 13 when I got it, but after I turned 14.  I realised it had glitches.  It took 14 minutes to turn on and that time increase daily.  The battery was always needing to stay plugged in and it was impossible to find wireless internet.  It's distance was small but it's a good laptop if you use it every so often. 
first lap top ,
9 lbs) and compactness.  Styling is plain & unobtrusive, compared with some other notebooks), which I like.  Keyboard is roomy and well laid out.  Battery life is good (over 3 hours with wifi constantly on).  I really don't like that IBM creates a hidden backup partition that takes around 5gigs of the hard drive.  I think IBM does this for supposed rapid restore in case of system death or something but I'd rather have this on external media. 
Battery life is good ,external media ,
  My hard drive fried after I had the laptop for less than 6 months and I ended up paying an additional 200 dollars to fix the problem.  That is the big drawback to buying a Sony computer- Their customer service.   After my experience, I decided to do some research online and I discovered that problems with customer service is a common complaint with Sony.     The good thing about Sony Vaio is that it comes fully equipped to handle things like digital cameras and videos.  Accessories go well with this computer. 
digital cameras ,good thing about Sony Vaio ,
I had recently purchased a Gateway 305XL from the local Gateway store.   The price seemed acceptable 999. 00 and with 512 GB of memory a 2. 4Ghz P4 processor, CD-RW/DVD-ROM it seemed like a good deal.   Tech support identified the problem as a defective system and said it would need to be replaced.     Long story short, even though I had purchased next day-on-site parts and labor warranty, it would be 7 - 10 days before I could get a replacement. 
local Gateway store ,good deal ,
The N800w is described as a Mobile Workstation, and it certainly is.   This is by far one of the most powerful laptop computers I've ever used.   Unequalled as a high-end multimedia laptop at work, and plays just about any game out there with ease.   I have always chosen a powerful laptop option, sacrificing portability for power, but this is the first time that I found that tradeoff worthwhile.   The only downsides are that it is fairly heavy, and with only a single PCMCIA slot and no Firewire port it isn't quite versatile enough. 
most powerful laptop computers ,
  Minor burns might result if your skin is tender.   My is pretty tough, so it's no problem.   Normally I'm at my desk or on the floor so burning is no problem.   A friend said all laptops get hot and that mine is pretty normal.     Now that I've complained, all-in-all, this is a great laptop for anyone who wants to buy their first laptop.   It is inexpensive (not cheap) and very reliable with WinXP and XPpro. 
is a great laptop for anyone ,
  my prior laptop had a 2. 4 ghz celeron.   The processor works well with several applications open.    Best Buy had a 512mg chip for $49.  with no rebates and I installed it myself.   I'm very satisfied with the computer. 
'm very satisfied with the computer ,
Purchased this computer about a month ago for $2,900.   The main thing about it is that it has an outstanding graphics and screen - 128MB video RAM.   All the latest games are just flying on this thing.   Also, it has 1. 7 GHz Pentium M, which is roughly equivalent to a 2. 9 GHz Pentium IV, but consumes less power - my battery lasts for about 5 hours. 
has an outstanding graphics ,latest games ,
great deal for the price.  works as hard as the high dollar note books. lite weight and easy to carry. well worth the money. 
great deal for the price ,high dollar note books ,
I've been using this laptop for about a month now.   After installing an additional 512MB of RAM ($44, chiefvalue. com), I have no problems web surfing, email, doing homework, and even playing some games with moderate 3D graphics.   I went into the BIOS and increased the shared video  The built-in wireless is a godsend.   Very strong signals.  I would and have recommend this to anyone wanting a basic laptop. 
built-in wireless ,
Great Computer.  Dollar for dollar you will not find a better laptop computer anywhere.  I use my umax everyday and I love it.  If you are looking for a good laptop and do not want to spend a ton of money the umax is a great choice. 
good laptop ,
)I mainly use it for programming, writing, web browsing and email, so I'm not hitting it with heavy graphics apps or anything of the like.  The fan isn't very loud, I usually only notice it when it's very quiet. I've been using this system for a year now, and it's still my favorite portable machine.  Even with the limited display resolution (800x480) I'll pick it  up before my MacBook with its 13. 
favorite portable machine ,
I bought mine at a boxing day sale in Canada as a refurbished unit and I find that it works great.       The screen is good although not as good as the Sony and the ram is a bit low, but it was half the cost of a Sony so I'm not complaining.      Customer service via e-mail is excellent.   I always receive a response within an hour no matter what time of day. 
works great ,not as good as the Sony ,screen is good ,Customer service via e-mail is excellent ,
  Good to very good display.  Fragile keyboard which lost its "n" and "m" at the one year point.   Gateway service was very good and sent a replacement keyboard to allow me to not have to return the entire laptop to them.   Laptop works okay with an external USB keyboard.     I travel a lot and need robustness more than anything.   This notebook didn't endure the twice a day trip to and from office in its own travel bag. 
very good display ,Gateway service was very good ,external USB keyboard ,
I am now on the second time around in sending this junk back to Acer to be fixed.   I have had it for over a month and was somewhat able to use it for a total of 4 days.       Spend a little more money and get a HP.   I will never buy another Acer product again. 
Spend a little more money ,
Unbelievable laptop, I've owned 7 different notebooks over 5 years.   Excellent graphics card and display, the r30 WAS really bad AT 16 mb.  I am running Win2KPro with 640MB RAM, very stable to say the least.   I've owned it for 6 onths now and have many gigs of software, never crashed or had a program stop responding yet (knock on wood).   A definite winner for value for money and quality in a great build. 
Excellent graphics card ,
 I believe this is ideal for any one and everyone who wants good graphics, storage and to multitask.  I would be very lost without my notebook.  This hp probook notebook meets my needs in the work force and might even surpass a few but it also has some drawbacks.  I also do not like the fact that you can see every where on the computer I have touched, but that is not a reason to not buy the computer.  Also, after only using it for 3 years the battery will no longer maintain a charge.  It is almost as if the battery will no longer connect to the computer in order to charge. 
wants good graphics ,
This is my job computer.   I run all Microsoft programs such as Windows XP, Word, Excel, Project, Outlook, Power Point, and Front Page.   Also, CAD programs such as AutoCad and Solid Designer.   Also need to connect to the intranet and internet at all times.   At work it is very handy since I can carry it to any conference room and connect wireless to the internet and intranet. 
connect wireless ,
This affordable laptop computer is perfect as a starter computer for students and those on a budget.  The laptop is stylish, but does have some downfalls such as it doesn't have a fantastic CPU, but that can be expected for the price.  The laptop is rather thin and can be transported very easily. 6 inch HP BrightView HD LCD Screen provides great visibility to those of fairly average and not so average eye-sight. 
laptop is rather thin ,BrightView HD LCD Screen provides great ,
 It is has  a really nice size screen for a netbook.  The netbook is a good size and color.  I had no problems with it.  built in WIFI card and sd memory card. 
nice size screen for a netbook ,is a good size ,
 I needed to get it fixed, so I told them to go ahead, but let me know how much it would cost.  They sent a shipping box with shipping charges prepaid.  I was pleasantly surprised at the quality of customer service I received.  Everyone was pleasant and the turn around time was much better than expected.  Plus, they repaired what could have been customer abuse under the warranty.  I would recommend them highly. 
time was much better ,
 Battery generate heat if keep on plugging the AC adapter while using for long time.    CD-rom drive is very fast and strong in installing softwares.  Could be lighter if with Lithium Ion battery.     I wish they added an infra red port, and multibay to be swappable with dvd, zip drive, 2nd hard drive.   It has not crashed yet despite the long-hours use for everyday.  Touchpad is nice and touchpad buttons are too strong. 
touchpad buttons ,Touchpad is nice ,
  Carrying 4 pounds, excellent good-size screen, great keyboard and trackpoint, I see nothing around that matches it.   I will be adding a Travelstar 20GNX, putting on it either Win2000 or XP.  I too put the Ultrabase in luggage (except when I want to play DVD's on a very long plane trip).     Original HD is 6.  Screen is 13. 
great keyboard ,excellent good-size screen ,very long plane trip ,
 Glad I did.  It took 8 days to get it because it came from Fujitsu in Osaka, Japan, but was definitely worth the wait. 
was definitely worth the wait ,
 It originally came with 64MB RAM, but I added another 128MB for $40.  It included the options I was looking for in a laptop.  I wanted one with DVD, integrated NIC and modem, at least 10GB with 128MB RAM, and at least a PIII 700Mhz processor.  Well I got everything I wanted for $1399 plus the ability to add extra memory.  All others that I was considering were over my $1500 budget, such as Dell and IBM.  It has been great to take on trips so that I can have internet access on the road and productive with work, plus watch my DVD movies. 
add extra memory ,
  New motherboard needed.  Monitor backlighting blacks out not once in a year, but I fear twice.       Even for an older machine, a 1 gig chip and 256 mb of RAM is enough for most folks, but its reliability is very very questionable.   $400 later I could have bought a new machine with a bigger than 20 gig HD (small. ); with USB 2 port and built in wi-fi. 
reliability is very very questionable ,
 they just don't make laptops like the P2120.  It seems to be the only laptop that truly is a LAP-top.  Everything else now seems large and bulky.     The only major flaw is the limited video capabilities.  If you want to enjoy a game of Warcraft III or something, it just won't work. 
is the limited video capabilities ,
 It doesnt get better for this price.  It needs 512 RAM for optimal performance but that is easy to install if you buy another 256 MB for about $50.  The keyboard light, the page toggle keys and volume keys are nice thoughtful additions.  The IBM keyboard is as expected. 
doesnt get better for this price ,volume keys are nice thoughtful ,
Light computer and good features.  Good price and there has never been any problems with it.   The design is nice and it is very compact. 
Good price ,design is nice ,
The Acer TravelMate 611TXV is a great machine for the money.   Featuring a Intel Pentium III processor running at 850 MHz, it offers the road warrior plenty of power and accessories to make the job easy. 
great machine for the money ,
  I love computers and they have become a necessary part of my life.   With my job, I needed a computer that could keep up with me.   I have been shopping for months for a good notebook computer.   I looked at HP, Dell, IBM, Alienware, Acer, Averatec, you name it.   When it came down to it, I had my heart set on the Compaq 2500 Series.   Let me tell you, I was very skeptical about the computer but after getting it home and toying it with you for a while, I was hooked. 
good notebook computer ,
  Compaq also makes reinstalling the OS with all the factory programs easy with a set of CDs.   The downsides are that RAM is very expensive for this computer and the hardrive is only 20 GB.   The laptop also only comes which Microsoft Works and doesn't include MS Word.   I tried using Works for a while but it crashed so often that I eventually uninstalled it and got Office which works fine.       HP/Compaq support is also very good. 
easy with a set of CDs ,HP\/Compaq support is also very good ,
It works for that, but is simply too big and heavy to carry around many places. That is where the Eee-PC comes in.  At 2lbs+ it is super portable and very easy to take just about anywhere. I wanted the 901 model for the extra storage, the wireless N card and the long (7 hour) battery life. I use the Eee PC for email, VPN access and access to various web sites. It comes with Star Office, but I really do not use this for working on documents, only reading the occasional email attachment. 
wireless N card ,extra storage ,
but if you are not comfortable with troubleshooting when things gone wrong linux can be a bit confusing.  it is not constructed at all like windows and the terms can be confusing.  last two months with replacement machine have been uneventful. the size and weight is perfect for carrying in a book bag or small brief case.  but it also results in a crunched up keyboard which my fat fingers have trouble with.  have connected to two brother usb printers and one hp usb printer successfully. 
weight is perfect ,
  I've even played Battlefield 1942 on this and it works surprisingly well.       The DVD playback is nice as this laptop has widescreen, and also has what is called "brightscreen" which is really sweet.   Very easy to read, even at angles and in lighter rooms.     I would recommend. I've only had one problem and that was a broken key. 
DVD playback is nice ,was a broken key ,
My Acer Aspire 1414 works fine, and that, since I bought it, almost 2 years ago now.  It runs smoothly, the colors are bright and sharp.     Two words to define this notebook: Quality.  Durability.     An excellent investment. 
colors are bright ,
This is one of my best buys ever.     the pentium m 850mhz procesors, works as fast as my desktop P4 1.     the display is great, crisp and brilliant, you can read it from any angle.     the mousepad is very accurate.     the computer has 10/100 ethernet, modem and wireless card, so you can be connecteed in any possible way. 
display is great ,wireless card ,
 They had never seen anything like it.  I would say that this product has a good quality.  I’m not sure if it would last a long time period, because i recently bought this item, but i would say to go for it.  I have not yet encountered any malfunctions or electronical breakdowns. 
has a good quality ,
  The speed is great.   We use it mostly in our living room connecting to the internet via an in-home wireless network.   The are only two downfalls.   One is that it has frozen up four times and I had to turn it off -- it could be the computer or the internet but I'm not sure.   The other is that we use the built in mouse and it can have a mind of it's own and be super sensitive even though I changed the settings.   It's not be annoying enough to use a plug in mouse. 
speed is great ,in-home wireless network ,
    The screen is excellent, the keyboard is not too great, but I've used worse.     Battery life is not too great, and you need to put some more RAM in it to get any performance.     The looks are great though, and the built in handle is actually very useful, you can carry it about the house or wherever easily.     Bit of a pain there being no floppy drive, or serial port, but not much.   Doesn't work well under linux as it's all acpi and a slightly broken implementation at that. 
screen is excellent ,keyboard is not too great ,Battery life is not too great ,being no floppy drive ,
 Apart from the Apple laptops, you'll be hard pressed to find a groovier object of desire.  It comes bundled with all the bits you need and is very easy to use, with a good screen, acceptable performance and a reasonably responsive keyboard.     The disk size at 10GB is a little on the low side, and the performance and battery life are nothing spectacular.  At 64MB the RAM is definitely undersized, but can be upgraded up to 512MB. 
good screen ,
7GHz DVD-ROM, 14. 1in, 128M, 30G are enough for the regular use.  I do not play PC games so much, but I like movie.  So 30G hardware is better for me to download movies, music,and picture. 
download movies ,
This is a pretty good laptop to use at home.  It does the basic stuff.  The instruction manual is not of much help as it is not detailed enough for a not so computer savvy person. This is the only laptop I have owned as I use desktops at work.  It went for repair 3 times within six  month I bought the computer from Best Buy, Cincinnati,Ohio.  But never had any problem after that except for occasional crashing. 
is a pretty good laptop ,savvy person ,
  Additionally, although not the fault of ASUS, having Windows Vista on it is a big downer.   (But that's for a different review. )     Another thing I didn't like that I realized after purchase is that the only USB ports are on the right rear.   I found this to be a bit inconvenient for quick installation and removal of flash drives.  At least one port on the side would have been nice.     Lastly, the front latch is cheap plastic. 
right rear ,only USB ports ,
I bought this second hand from my work when they were auctioning off old PC's so bought it for an excellent price.   I am happy with the performance since my machine has 512MB of ram.    I have installed Linux Mandrake on this machine and it runs very well after upgrading to the latest BIOS available from the HP/Compaq site.    In this respect this machine is brilliant, as would any other HP/Compaq machine be.    For my needs (media playing mostly) this Laptop has enough grunt for playing music/movies very well. 
excellent price ,
My wife has the Satelite 5230 and the Tecra 8100 just plain blows it away.   I play movies on mine even with it's limited video capablities (Shrek lags it a bit but Jurasic park 3 plays fine). 
's limited video capablities ,
  Dell makes a good product that is dependable and easy to use out of the box.   The only drawback is the "small" screen size and it seems a little wobbly as the months go by.   I don't like how the screen goes dark when not plugged in and I've checked every setting I know to change this.   I'm fairly technical so I know where all the settings are to change this but have yet to be successful. 
makes a good product ,
  Light, portable, battery life is simply great (6 hrs or more) I ordered it with a Gig of ram and have never needed more.   Only drawback is screen is hard to see outside in bright light.   If you need portable computing with a small footprint on long flights this is the baby for you.   I use excel and all the office programs with ease.   Powerpoint runs great.  4 usb, 1 firewire, S-Video. 
battery life is simply great ,bright light ,need portable ,Powerpoint runs great ,
This laptop is a great value and very easy to use.   It has quick speed and very vivid colors.   It suits our needs for watching movies, doing homework, and general internet browsing.   We really like the keyboard, too.   We would highly recommend this laptop. 
is a great value ,very vivid colors ,
Toshiba notebooks are the steadiest in the arena of laptops.  The casing is touch and durable, if you drop it won&#146t affect the screen at all.  I first brought my Toshiba September of 07 and have been happy with this purchase ever since.  I use my laptop for everything because the  dual core processors and ram is really a bang for your buck honestly. 
dual core processors ,
  I started low in price, thinking Dell, but the more I read, the more I wanted better multimedia and networking, plus dvd writing.   It came down to a Sony or Toshiba.   The Satellite M45X-S331 finally got my vote as best overall bang for the buck.   This unit connected to my home network just minutes after removing it from the box.     The display is widescreen, and so much sharper and brighter than anything else in this price range. 
best overall bang for the buck ,display is widescreen ,
 Then I went on the website to choose the all features and got overwhelmed.  I was sold on the Intel Centrino technology (it runs cooler), the large screen (I use the laptop as my desktop), and the internal CD/DVD drives.  I paid $1399, but ended getting $100 credit after I saw it listed for $1299 at Circuit City (this was almost 4 weeks later.    I've already burned a few music CD's, bought an iPod mini & transferred songs to it easily, and am very pleased with the 3 USB ports. 
large screen ,
  It worked well, quick and had a great screen.   Battery life was marginal but about to be expected w/the the system configuration.   I got this laptop for 650 after discounts and after a year I can see why.   The actual build quality of the machine is pretty lousy. 
had a great screen ,
 The widescreen is crisp and clear.  It is 100% reliable, and the only con is the fact that because its a widescreen its difficult to get a case.  But once that problem is resolved its 100% Pros.      I would recommend this laptop to anyone who wants a reliable and fast laptop, the built in wireless is especially handy.     Review written by Simon  Any problems feel free to email Simon6226@aol. com  Have fun shopping. 
widescreen is crisp ,
 It is light, has a good battery, and its just the right size.  It has a DVD/CD burner too, and that is great to have.  I've had about 5 laptops in the past 8 years, and this one, hands down, is deffently the best out of them all.  I love how it has an SD card slot in front.  that makes it so easy to upload pictures straight from your SD card. 
has a good battery ,
I've never owned a laptop before, although I have built PCs from the ground up.  I purchased the Dell Inspiron 1150 because I wanted a notebook from a manufacturer I trusted, and with a good warranty without paying a whole bunch.     My model came with an Intel Celeron 2. 60GHz processor and a 15" xga screen, 30 gig hard drive and 384 meg ram.  I opted to upgrade to Windows XP pro, as I was wary about what a lot of installed programs would do to XP home.     Shipped quicker than they said it would, out of the box, it worked great, except for a single crash the first time it came out of safe mode. 
worked great ,
I was always a Sony girl, but Acer is quickly changing that, at least as far as PC's go.   It is sleek, tons of memory, super fast, and so far 100% reliable.   Vista is not an issue at all at this point.   I am thrilled someone is making a high-end laptop at a low-end price. 
low-end price ,
  I end up storing really large files on other machines.   I'd upgrade the harddrive if I could do it easily/cheaply.   The CD-RW/DVD-ROM drive is easy to use.   Startup is a little noisy.   The Thinkpad comes with software for burning CDs.   There are 2 USB ports, 2 PC Card slots and video, audio, LAN and phone ports as well. 
CD-RW\/DVD-ROM drive is easy ,
  During that time it has flown with me almost every weekend - and has taken a few road trips in between, too.   The computer has performed flawlessly during the entire time.     I tend to run a lot of CPU and memory intensive applications, but this computer handles that pretty well.   Recently I upgraded the standard 512MB memory to 1 GB, and what was already good performance improved.   So far it hasn't disappointed me.   The display is bright and clear, and the computer produces amazingly good sound out of speakers the size of a quarter. 
was already good performance ,upgraded the standard 512MB memory ,display is bright ,
I can't believe the quality and the durability of this machine.   I bought it from Tiger Direct as a "closeout" special; it came with a 60GB hard disk and 256MB RAM, Win2k professional.   I think I fell in love when the screen lit up for the first time.   It's been on pretty much 18 hours a day every day for the past year and a half and I haven't grown tired of it yet.   (I'm running Mandrake Linux and Win98 for compatibility tests alongside my Win2k stuff. )    Highly, highly recommended. 
past year ,
5 AMD Atholon processor with 256 MB of RAM, which is easily upgradeable (I upgraded mine to 512).   It has a CD-RW/DVD combo drive, as well as a floppy drive.   The DVDs play very smoothly with no interruptions, and high quality sound.   It has a 15 inch screen which makes viewing movies even more enjoyable.   This laptop is also able to burn CDs at high speeds without any complications.   It has a 30 gig hard drive, which I think is more than enough storage space for a laptop. 
floppy drive ,high quality sound ,
 I have to trash my laptop.  I tried to call Toshiba, tried to get repair and every time the same problem repeats.  So please avoid ant Toshiba Laptop.   I have lost my data many times and have waisted hours and hours to re do the data.  I have purchased other computers like Dell, apple, HP without any problems, but I am sorry I will never buy Toshiba. 
many times ,have purchased other computers like Dell ,
    The T40 also features the Pentium-M processor (part of the Centrino technology to improve battery life).  Although most laptop computers never wander far from a wall outlet, you do have the ability now with the exceptional battery life of this model.  The Pentium-M processor also performs on a par with the Pentium 4M chip, so you aren't giving up any performance.     The graphics card is exceptional although it could have been beefed up to 64 MB of RAM instead of 32. 
graphics card is exceptional ,
 I had to do it myself with the disk.  Also, the built-in wireless card wasn't - built-in, that is - it was missing.     I did have to replace the fan about 6 months ago, but all in all it has held up well with daily use.  (I don't count the coffee in the keyboard, that was MY fault and of course not covered by the extended service plan - expensive lesson.  Aside from the formatting and wireless issue that I'm sure was a unique problem, I LOVE this computer. 
built-in wireless card ,
I used to have one my self it was a great tool and I used it almost every day.  it is very good besides the battery life i got which was if i was lucky 2 hours.  So i think that if your looking for a dedicated notebook this is it. 
was a great tool ,very good besides the battery life ,
I bought this laptop to replace an HP (What a surprise).   I enjoyed running Crysis 2 at top resolution without any stutters.   It has a nicely backlit keyboard and a brilliant screen.   When you get sick of replacing parts in your Dell and HP, come visit Asus, you won't be disappointed. 
has a nicely backlit keyboard ,
This laptop is amazing. 2" widescreen LCD is VERY crisp and clear, the sound is amazing (for a laptop), and the integrated slot load 8X CD-RW / DVD-ROM drive.   The features this computer had are great, not to mention the Mobile Pentium 4 processor, 512mb ram, AND a 40gig hard drive.   You can play MP3's (located on the computer OR integrated SD card slot), CD's, and MP3 CD's without the computer even being on.   This is another Gateway winner. 
laptop is amazing ,widescreen LCD is VERY crisp ,sound is amazing ,
 Paid $500 at Best Buy in mid-September 2008.   Biggest annoyance is the defective power cord which causes the PC to run off the battery not electricity.   I received a  new power cord which also doesn't operate correctly.   Second problem is buying a Dell from a third party retailer. 
Best Buy in mid-September ,
The Dell Latitude C400 PC Notebook is pretty good all around.  The ultraslim design makes it easy to carry around without taking up too much space.  The P3 processor seems to process commands fairly quickly while running Windows XP.  The only downfall to this Notebook is that you have to connect your cd-rom and floppy drive with a cord which makes things a little less convenient. 
C400 PC Notebook is pretty good ,
It seemed to be the right computer for travel.   Lightweight, reasonable size screen, full featured, latest processor, etc.   But, I've had two malfunction in less than 6 months.   I've had better reliability from others and its embarrassing to have a computer break during a business presentation. 
latest processor ,'ve had better reliability from others ,
  How about who played the 'Bad', in "The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly".   Easily and quickly access nba. com and imdb. com to answer these two questions.   (You'll need a wireless internet system of course). 
wireless internet system of course ,
Ram is cheap and I recommend upgrading to 2 GB ASAP as well as replacing the horrible Windows7 Starter that comes with this system. Once I did these things, I'm pretty happy with it overall.  I love the size factor and it is powerful enough to play streaming videos if NOT full screen. If you can get it for $250 or less that would be a great bargain that you can spend the savings for more RAM and the Win7 Upgrade. 
NOT full screen ,
Very good, quality laptop with good memory specs, speed, video, everything you need right out of the box.   Decent sized hard drive.   I could not get it to work correctly on my home network out of the box as it comes pre-installed with Vista Basic.   In doing so, I had to locate the various drivers online for the XP version of all the hardware.   Now the system runs like a champ, got on the network right off the bat from the moment I turned it on.   A really good value for the money, as long as you can downgrade it to XP I'd say. 
comes pre-installed with Vista Basic ,really good value for the money ,
I bought the Best Buy E105 which isn't listed.   This seems a great general use Notebook with adequate screen size and good spec on battery life. 
bought the Best Buy E105 ,
 The only problem is that the battery isn't that good.  The battery lasts only and hour and a half after a full charge.  I just done think that is good.  You might not even be able to watch a DVD. 
full charge ,
This is the most amazing computer.   I got mine in the mail a few days ago, and I am really impressed with it.   It is very powerful, with great battery life and nice features.   The mouse hasn't worked well for me, but that doesn't matter because I have a different mouse I would prefer to use anyway.   The screen on this computer is really crisp and colors come through very nicely; the wireless is really strong as well. 
is the most amazing computer ,great battery life ,
 it has nice resolution and picture but its just a hunk of metal and plastic that just falls apart.  ive owned it for not even 5 months and ive gone through 4 power cords and have been holding the screen up the entire time.  and every port has broken with little effort needed at all and theres just way to many flaws. really all this laptop is good for is a lap warmer. 
laptop is good ,
 Additionally, if you plan on buying this for home use, you should still click through the &#147home office/ small business&#148 section on dell.  Unfortunately, there is no docking station available for this computer, which I was sad to hear, so I will have to do without.  Also, only has 2 usb ports, but I suggest buying Bluetooth accessories anyways. 
small business ,
 My friends' bad experiences with ohter makers machines and good experiences with IBM helped the choice perhaps.  I use it for home and school, and it  delivers.  The Pentium M 725 runs extremely quiet and cool, this one won't burn your wrists. 
good experiences with IBM ,
I have this very light laptop for 4 years with no problems.  I use it every day using its wireless connection and the only changes was adding additional memory. 
wireless connection ,
 From its powerful specs to the great software.  Comes with XP.  This laptop comes with Cd-r/rw/dvd(player only) combo drive.  This laptop is totally worth the money.  With very strong 512 mb memory inside and its powerful Intel Celeron M Processor 330 (1. 4GHz, 512KB L2 cache, 400MHz FSB). 
great software ,powerful specs ,laptop is totally worth ,powerful Intel Celeron M Processor ,
I love this computer.  Great screen resolution, amazing handwriting recognition, packed with features in a nice small package.  Windows Vista has been a bit of a headache-to put it mildly, though like the Mac-like visuals. 
nice small package ,
 The sockets for both are sensibly at the back so that you don't have wires coming out sideways and getting in your way like so many other laptops.     There is also the strange addition of a 'TV out' socket on the side of the laptop.  Great for if you want to use the laptop to give presentations but otherwise redundant.     Otherwise all the sockets and ports are well positioned and include the standard: 2 x USB, 2 x PC Card, Video out etc). 
so many other laptops ,
The main thing you notice about this is the noise.  Even with quality earplugs, it's still too noisy to concentrate.  Spend the extra to get a processor designed for mobile computing.      Also had some technical glitches when first bought that required reformatting / reinstalling.     Battery connection stopped working after a couple years.  It appears to switch to battery mode, but after a few moments the electric current stops and the screen suddenly blacks out. 
extra to get a processor ,
 I’m a woman and care too much about the look of a netbook, but Acer Aspire One is better than I could even expect.  It’s slim and stylish.  There are a lot of positive features that I can name but the most important thing is that it’s powerful and operates without any problems.  Just a pleasure to work with.  If you hesitate about buying it or not - don't doubt, just buy it and you'll love it from the first touch of your fingers.  The touch pad is very convenient and there is no difficulty working with it. 
touch pad is very convenient ,
Proud to have one. Wireless excellent, display great,   only complain is no serial port.  I use PCMCIA to Serial Adapter works great. 
works great ,
 The sound output was pretty low.  Literally we couldn't hear the sound coming out of the net book. We increased the volume to the maximum on both Windows sound properties and youtube, still same issue.  Video was good. 
Video was good ,
 It literally fist like a notebook i always carry it around in my purse when i need to go out and it weighs nothing.  It runs fast and it works great.  But otherwise it runs great. What I DO NOT like about this product is that it does not have a CD/DVD drive so it is very limited when it comes to that.  I was used to being able to put in a CD on my old computer. 
works great ,runs great ,
 Terrific performance, excellent tech support by phone and optionally onsite.      Many hours of battery life, especially if you use the optional the 9-cell battery pack.  As others have mentioned there is no serial port, but since everything's USB these days, no problem.      My one wish is that this model had a Firewire port, which would make my backup processes run even faster.      I recommend the T40 without reservation. 
excellent tech support by phone ,
 But also on the other hand it isnt *Very Light* like some of those laptops that weigh 3 pounds.      The one thing that really bugs me is the screen though.  I dont liek the Brightview but I couldnt get it without.  Also the screen being Widescreen is good on some things but not the others.       There is one design flaw in all the laptops.  When you close the laptop there is a gap still between the screen and the body. 
Widescreen is good ,
I paid for mine $ 1100 but it was 18 months ago,(wow 2. 7 GIG) battery still working great just like new.  There is wireless PC card installed so if you have DSL or cable, all you need is wireless router.  and you on line without any cables. 
working great ,is wireless router ,is wireless PC card ,
  The cover is a snazzy blue.   The one time I have called tech support was over a wireless connection issue last week.   I had a technician on the phone in less than 5 minutes and he had me up and running again about 5 minutes later.   I can't stress enough how refreshing it is to have a computer that works well with no problems.   I own 4 desktop PCS (Sony, Dell, HP & E Machines) and have had a lot of trouble with hardware and tech support availability. 
wireless connection issue ,have called tech support ,
 they all feel like they were put together with things like webcams and purple plastic just to impress the bosses and get it to market fast).     This laptop is a keeper.   Seriously consider it and I feel you won't regret it.     Tips:  Get one with 512mb ram(the standard 256 might make you think the computer is slow)    Good Luck. 
Good Luck ,
I am very happy with this notebook and with HP.  I bought myself a notebook for Christmas 2006 and by Feb.  2007 that notebook took a dump.   After alot of tech support Hp gave me this beauty, I am in love.  I just use my notebook for home and a little for business.  Both of my kids now want a notebook, to bad they are stuck on the home pc for now. 
little for business ,
      the big question is now that i've used it, can it live up to today's standard for ultra light laptops.     the answer is.   yes, because its still as light as can be nowadays.   no, because you take this sr7k with you without any cd or floppy drives and you have to use a pc card to use the wireless connection.   throw in the 1 pc card feature and 1 usb slot and you got just a laptop that is, well, nostalgic.     read the other posts on this unit for comparable features and reviews. 
floppy drives ,use the wireless connection ,
  The best point about it is the operating system it comes with, Windows 2000 Professional that works great.   The battery life is about 3 to 4 hours when used with the brightest screen setting.       The biggest problems I had with this laptop is the lack of a serial or parallel port for synching my Palm devices with or my printer too.   I had to use the USB port to connect to the Hewlett-Packard printer I have. 
works great ,
  Even if some problem causes Windows to fail, IBM's software allows users to go online and hopefully find a solution.   Connecting to a LAN via Ethernet or Wi-Fi is easy.   The hard drive is somewhat slow compared to those found in desktops and the CD-RW/DVD drive is unusually slow sometimes.   Performance is very good, mainly because of the Pentium-M processor. 
Performance is very good ,
  It is great.   Mine features the mouse pointer and the touchpad.  Along with dvd reader and cdrw combo drive as well as the 512 mb of ram in mine it is a great multimedia machine.  This laptop will also allow you to hotswap drives from the dvd/cdrw to say the floppy drive or whatever.   The screen is good size and bright.   The battery lasts for hours and has held up well over the past couple years. 
say the floppy drive ,screen is good ,past couple years ,
 Windows Vista is the best windows yet, and Basic is all most users will need.  The CD burner is great and with a 15. 4" wide screen its a amazing sight. 
is the best windows ,
 And with those tasks.  It works great.  It can handle word processing software like Office pretty good.  And of course, internet surfing is a breeze. With a 17" Crystal display, its a big ol' nice clear screen to look at.  My only complaint is the casing. 
works great ,big ol' nice clear screen ,
 It was tough enough to last my entire tour, and I am currently using it in college.      Most impressions people share with me when I have it out are along the lines of confusing it with a portable DVD player.  It is that, but better and more.     I should also mention the battery life is outstanding.  I can turn off some features and make the battery last about 4:30. 
portable DVD player ,
  1GB memory is barely adequate for Windows Vista and the standard configuration takes both memory slots so upgrading will be expensive.  Also for a notebook at this price you should get the AGN wireless networking for its much higher speed.   This means you shouldn't order the standard configuration and thus the shipping time will be about 2 weeks. 
memory is barely adequate ,much higher speed ,
Good computer, nice design, thin, works like a charm and reliable.  It is a good laptop with 20 different models in the 600 series.  The keyboard is one on which you can actually touch typw, which is almost exactly like a desktop keyboard.  It is sturdy enough that it can be jiggled around ( not recommended) and dropped (also not recommended). 
Good computer ,nice design ,
  The 2 GB of RAM and Centrino Duo processor provide adequate processing power for most applications without any degradation in performance.     Has been dropped a couple of times without any harm.   The usual bundled software is ever-present and useless.   Battery life I find to be adequate at just over 2 hours. 
Centrino Duo processor provide adequate ,
"  Well, when my head cleared from the fall off the back of the turnip truck, I decided to call tech support at Sony.   Seems they have been having that happen to everyone who bought one of these models (both the PCG-FX210 and the FX215).   So often in fact that they will send a free back-up battery to anyone who requests it.   Well, that still only allows for a "whopping" 40 minutes away from an outlet.   So, I guess there really is no way anyone could recommend a laptop which has none of the advantages OF a laptop (ie. 
call tech support at Sony ,
 Although I have no use for the integrated wifi at home its very nice to have when I am traveling.  The built in web cam is a nice feature to have if you have friends or family that live away from you.  i use it often and haven't had any problems with it so far.  For the size of the hard drive this laptop is under priced which is great for people, like I said before, that are on a budget. The screen is really bright, SO much better then my old dell. 
screen is really bright ,
I have this laptop for about two years and still I don't need to change it.  In Spec's written that screen resolution is 1280 x 800, but mine is 1680 x 1050 on 15,4 in monitor.  There are plenty of space for all your works: image, video or sound editing.  It's very good for those who are drawing draft or schemes.  And all laptop specs are good for all these works too.  I only upgraded RAM memory to 4Gb. 
laptop specs are good ,
 I also liked that the keys are pretty similar to that of an in-home computer so it does not take long to adjust to the changes.  This feature is a huge convenience.     It also has a large screen and is a bigger one but the quality of the image is very good.  The sound quality is also good at average volume levels. 
image is very good ,has a large screen ,
I mainly use this laptop as a desktop alternative(external monitor hooked-up and additional accessories).   Hard drive began to fail shortly after purchase, had to send entire unit to Sony to have them replace the hard drive.   Wish they had a hard drive replacement program, I could have replaced the hard drive myself.   Got unit back from Sony, they replaced the hard drive, so far so good. 
external monitor hooked-up ,
I picked this up on ebay for $99 (corporate lease return) as a  potential Linux box.   Absolutely without question the best laptop I have for the money.      So, if money's tight - definately check these out on ebay.   For my money, a much better deal than buying cheap and new. 
best laptop ,deal than buying cheap ,
 In the span of one year, I have had to replace the DVD drive and keyboard.  The batteries are notorious for failing within two years.  At $160 a pop, this is no laughing matter.     Unless you buy an expensive warranty, Dell WILL NOT HELP YOU.  You are out of luck.  Dell outsources their technical service to India. 
buy an expensive warranty ,
For this laptop, I think you get your moneys worth.  It is a nice laptop that is easy to learn. 
is a nice laptop ,
This is a device that is pretty good and does what its supposed to but still lacks the charms that a 11" notebook has to have.  I have had Acer mini notebooks before and one thing is for sure that they last pretty long and their performance doesn't deteriorate with time. This one is equipped with the AMD C-50 processor and you get intel's atom in the market in the same price range.  So it has fars superior interms of processing and price to its market counter parts.  But isn't that much lightweight and the heats up pretty high for a 11" notebook.  But overall provides good processing speed with nice performance. 
nice performance ,
 Since then we have jetted our other desktop and used this computer exclusively.  Which brings me to a couple of cons: 1) HEAVY.  10 hours of cavorting with this thing in your briefcase and you'll need a chiropractor.  2) battery life is not great, enough so that I get nervous when there is no plug even if I only need it 20 minutes and it is fully charged.  3) When plugged in it works pretty well; when on battery power, the conservation settings cause it to run pretty slowly.  4) The battery completely died after 2 years, but this is to be expected. 
battery life is not great ,
  The keyboard is bigger than most and it has mouse button both above and beneath the touchpad.   You can add Bluetooth capability to it easily with Dell Bluetooth 350 module.   Also, I can vouch for Dell&#146s tech support.   I don&#146t have a tremendous amount of respect for people who swear either that Dell or HPs tech support is good or bad.   However, I call tons Dell and HP daily, and I can say Dell is miles ahead.   You may get a good or bad person on either one, but as far as consistent quality, Dell is better. 
support is good ,
Since this computer is called a 'netbook' you cannot expect much in the way of drives and complex programs. I am a 40 yr old stay-at-home mom and I LOVE to surf on this computer.  I use email, skype, IM and the like.  This computer is great for someone like me, or a student, or someone who does not need a lot. 
computer is great ,
Bought 3 months ago, when looking for a  cheap, small laptop for when I travel.   It almost seemed to cheap, compared to what most small and light laptops run.   But, it is small, light, has a nice bright screen, and a surprisingly usable keyboard for such a small computer.   It is also much faster than I expected for a Celeron computer.   Wireless works well, fit and finish are very good, the power supply is nice and small, as well.   I am really quite surprised and pleased with my purchase, and would recommend it to anyone looking for a small laptop for when you travel. 
light laptops ,has a nice bright screen ,finish are very good ,power supply is nice ,
  I found that the Fujitsu T4220 fit all of my requirements.   I have never owned a tablet PC, so I had to get used to it for some time.   After learning how to use it, the stylus and touch screen became very convenient and nice to use when taking notes in class.   This computer is somewhat expensive, but it comes with many nice perks that are not seen in any other computers in its class.   The keyboard is very nice because it is a full size keyboard with very nice and smooth keys.   The mouse track pad has a supple texture that makes it easy for the user to use it. 
keyboard is very nice ,
This is a great computer I have been using it for a year now and had no problems whatsoever.  For people that say that it works slow then upgrade to 4 gig ram thats what I did and it works fast and perfect no faults. 
is a great computer ,
    The graphics look good.   The screen is bright and has good viewing angles.   The screen is way too small for fulltime use in my opinion.   I use a docking station with a 20" monitor for my office work.     The main benefit to the x-Series laptops from Lenovo/IBM is their size.   This thing is tiny, lightweight, and gets great battery life. 
graphics look good ,screen is bright ,screen is way too small ,gets great battery life ,
My worries about buying a small laptop primarily concerned whether it could endure hours of daily use.   After 5 months of heavy usage both on and off-line, my assessment is a resounding yes.   The machine does not come with tons of software "freebies" which may be a relief to some and the documentation is short and to the point.      What I am most impressed with is the speed of the processor and how fast it boots up.   There is very little waiting for any activity. 
buying a small laptop ,
    I work in Networking so I am constantly on the road running all over to our 60+ locations, working on the network.  This laptop is able to handle the constant travel and use, with relative ease.     It's not made to work like a toughbook, ruggedized PC, but it still manages to take bumps and bruises pretty well.     The keyboard is a generous size for 'fatter' fingers like mine  :--) and the screen is crisp and clear.   I have always been a pointer mouse user and I love having it in the middle of the keyboard. 
screen is crisp ,
 I'm an electronic engineer and use it extensively in all kind of matters (from running complex simulations to write emails) and it works just great.  I have to let it on. I was a little prevented with the fame of poor quality from Compaq, but it seems like since HP bought Compaq it improved amaizingly.    The sreen is outstanding and makes the difference with all the other brands. 
works just great ,
This is a good laptop.  It has a nice bright LCD screen, and a good array of features.  Speakers are also good.  While using it i found that i needed more ram, so i added a Gb, to make the maximum 2 gigs.  The graphics card included is not the best, and is the limiting factor on this laptop. 
is a good laptop ,has a nice bright LCD screen ,Speakers are also good ,
Compared to other laptops that I have used this R40 really has a great keyboard.   The display looks great and it has a nice sturdy feel to it.   The built in microphone needs help but how important is that. 
has a great keyboard ,has a nice sturdy feel ,display looks great ,
I've had this computer for about 3 months now, and I was surprised at how fast it could open programs and how easily it connected to my router.  I have never had a problem with it dropping a signal, which had constantly been a problem with my old one. The laptop runs great, it is perfect for a college student, and at only five pounds it isn't too heavy to take with you.  It can run any of the basic programs you would need for school, and does really well with multi-tasking.  The wireless service is great, it will easily connect to a signal from just about anywhere.  Although it is not a gaming laptop, I've found that it can run most games with little lag on a medium setting. 
is perfect for a college student ,
I have been using this net-book for a few months now and can't think of any complaints.  I do miss the CD but only when i have to transfer software to a zip drive then to the net-book.  This thing is fast on wireless and the battery life is excellent, three hours is nothing and the recharging rate is quick.  It's light and east to carry around.  If you want a mobile companion then consider the Samsung nc10. 
battery life is excellent ,
 I have had no problems with it, and have had it now for a little under 5 months.  Another thing ACER should work on in future models, would be a more user friendly mouse.  Great flash programs came along with the bundle pack I purchased, with some terrific software.  Cannot complain.  Good size hard drive for such a precious little system.  The only downfall, if you can consider it as such, is that it does'nt have the CD/DVD cababilities. 
Good size ,
  I give it "two thumbs up. " For all of the so called New-Bees in the "It" world, this computer is unbelievably easy to use.   It comes with all of the necessary programs for school, business, and even gaming.   As for the internal specs, this computer's graphics and sound cards are among the best in the business.  Portability is no question with this machine.   It's sleek and stylish design provides the consumer with a light weight very versatile machine. 
computer is unbelievably easy ,best in the business ,light weight ,
 I require doing a lot of configuration in my field, so require Serial ports.  Keyboard is quite good and there is no need to type heavily.  Dell has provided with two serial ports for that usage.   Nice small laptop to take around where ever you go, not that heavy.  Battery life is not that good; it discharges really fast and doesn’t hold it. 
Keyboard is quite good ,Nice small laptop ,
The only thing worse than my Gateway 3522 GZ is Gateway itself.     My unit can't make up it's mind if it wants to connect to my wireless network or not.   I can be on top of my router and it still won't connect.   Not so with the Dell.   I can be outside and get a good connection.   And talk up about slow to boot up. 
wireless network ,
This computer is really great for the price.  No bugs so far, very rapid, nice webcam included (if set up correctly), nice display.  Definitely worth buying if you need a "desk" laptop.  Not very great if you move all the time though.  Too heavy and low battery time (although you rarely have more than 3h for this price and ths configuration).  Also a little bit too warm near the pad. 
computer is really great ,
Just purchased this laptop for work.  I am a computer/it manager for a local department store and I am a pretty hard user of computers.  I thought the duo processor and 2gb of ram was a good choice and for the price it was great. 8ghz with 1gb ram. 
local department store ,
  I wonder why.     So, I am forced to use a mouse outside, that's fine.       Another problem I have with this computer is that, it only comes with one serial port, where the other is occupied by  an internal modem.  What does that mean.   Well, here comes the problem, friend of mine has two different serial device to hook up to the laptop.   He has only one option now, unplug the connector and reconnect and/or uninstall the software and reinstall it or end the process every time. 
internal modem ,
Comes up quick even with a number of installed programs.  Large screen, light weight, and durable.  Battery life seems a bit short. 
Large screen ,light weight ,
This laptop works pretty good.  Works well with windows vista once you get all the updates installed.  With mozilla firefox, it has a good internet speed.  A little slow with internet explorer.  Nice design.  Speakers could be louder. 
has a good internet speed ,Nice design ,
 This was my first laptop and I haven't had any problems with it yet, its been about a month.  I have downloaded programs, movies, and songs on it like it was my job and I haven't noticed a change in its performance.  I would recommend this to anyone and everyone.  It is lighter than most, looks good, and always works great.  Definitely the most bang for the buck. 
works great ,
 The ample horsepower provided by the XP2200 processor and 512MB RAM are more than enough for almost any user.  Other than its hefty weight, it is a great machine to own.  The machine handled Office, Internet, gaming, streaming video, and music with no problems.  I compared this machine to many others in the same price range, and it was the best machine for the money.  It comes with Windows XP, lots of bonus software, and is easy to use for anyone from entry-level to an IT professional like myself.  It has performed flawlessly since day one, and will likely continue to be a useful tool in my IT arsenal for quite some time. 
is a great machine ,best machine for the money ,
This laptop was an impulse buy, but I think it was worth it as the quality is quite good.   The screen is a nice size and quite easy on the eyes.      The keyboard is standard, and no effort required.  The touch pad is not as sensitive to the touch as others but still responds ok.     The laptop came installed with Win XP, would much rather have just been able to request Win 98 be installed, but that was not an available option. 
quality is quite good ,is a nice size ,quite easy on the eyes ,touch pad is not as sensitive ,
We purchased our PCG-F520 in June 2000.   We are still happy with it although we wish we had a CD-RW drive in it.   We can use WinZip and create a zip file that spans several floppy disks.   We do that sometimes but it is a time-consuming process. 
several floppy disks ,
 I do not understand how a U.  company what should be knocking Dell off their laptop perch could ignore such an integral part of the business.  Really disappointing.  Ended up fixing it myself via Intel's online site and drivers. 
online site ,
After using the Toshiba A105-S4001 laptop for two weeks I am very pleased with Intel Core Solo processor chip.  The lap top has a wonderful clear 15. 4" screen and 512 memory with a 60 gig hard drive which I find more than adequate.  The PC \started up with NO problems up to now and for 569 dollars after 200 dollar rebate is really a great buy.  The machine rivals my desktop and far exceeds my 2 year old Compaq laptop which, I should say has been overheating lately and became unreliable.  I would recommend this laptop to any one who needs a work horse PC. 
great buy ,
)  Keyboard is normal size with good pitch.   Action on keys could be better but ill take light weight over better keyboard any day.   Loads software a little slowly while on battery but i think thats a feature designed to save power.    2 usb ports are adequate since you dont need to swap in an external keyboard.   Touch pad works very well and allows double-click on pad(dont need to click pad-button).  Machine is silent(ive heard people complaning about the fan but mine is fine). 
usb ports are adequate ,
I have had this laptop for a little over a year now and it has not given me any problems.  I love the touch volume control/quick play panel located at the top of the keyboard, but it can be delayed or too sensitive at times.  It is lightweight great for on the go.  The battery holds a pretty good charge, but sometimes I have to pull out my charger earlier than expected.  This is an affordable HP laptop.  The bottom line is if you are looking for a sleek design, reasonably price, great features, convenient, this laptop is for you. 
little over a year ,sleek design ,
  I got it for a good price, and it was my first ever laptop.   I bought the laptop for college and after one semester, it has already bit the dust.   Never will I purchase a Dell again.   I highly discourage the purchasing of this product. 
good price ,
Just purchased the A250.   Many good features and an overall attractive laptop.   Large hard drive, CD and DVD burner, Centrino chip and good memory.   The only problems so far are a sensitive touch pad and burning the recovery disks. 
overall attractive laptop ,Many good features ,Large hard drive ,are a sensitive touch pad ,
This laptop is a fantastic value.   You won't find a better price w/out having to deal with mail in rebates.   I paid 699 at CompUSA.   This is a great laptop for the student.  It's got a respectful 40 gig hard drive, 512 in RAM and the processor seems to be fine as well. 4 crystal clear display is a pleasure to look at. 
is a fantastic value ,great laptop for the student ,clear display ,
I owned a compaq computer but it has two problems.  Before I get to the problems overalls it is a good laptop with good sleek look.  It has more advantages than disadvantages.  One of the problems I found with this laptop brand is very low battery that I estimated to last about 20 minutes, when its adapter is not plug in.  Due to this fact this laptop is not good for mobility. 
fact this laptop is not good ,
  Vista really makes this laptop run pretty slow after you load a few more programs onto it. with all of the memory and the HD space, there should be no reason for it to run slow.  I'm not a big fan of the volume controls on the keyboard because they are really buggy, but overall the keyboard is nice.  Everytime I call in they have sent me a box within 2 days to send my laptop back and explained extended warranties when I requested.   Note: I am a heavy user & use my laptop at least 6-8 hours a day. 
run slow ,keyboard is nice ,
 Not going to find specs like that on a netbook. You can get the unit with Vista, or XP.  Many companies have unfortunately stopped this practice.  Whichever you choose, the EliteBook will hum along and compute anything you throw its way.  After you are done you can sit back and watch a DVD and relax. 
Many companies ,
I needed a laptop for the basic e-mails, to write papers, to keep records, play CD's, etc.  and this computer has proved to exceed my expectations.  It comes equipped with the basics and more.  There are two USB ports on both sides of the computer, a sony memory stick port, headphones, and the overall design is aesthetically pleasing. 
basic e-mails ,
  I had it running in matter of minutes and was cruising the net.   I have already tried out a movie and a slide show of photos I had taken.   The only thing that bothers me is the maximum volume is not enough if there is a little background noise.   I solved that by simply putting on headphones while watching the movie.   I found that this little machine did not run any hotter than my larger laptop. 
little machine ,
This is one of three laptops that I own.  This particular VAIO is used by several people and I don't use it to store important data on.  This is a little power house and it definately has served my purposes for fast wireless internet access and for researching.  Otherwise this VAIO works well.  I would recommend to Sony that they put the power in the back, and the  USB's towards the back of the laptop rather than towards the front. 
fast wireless internet access ,
2 GHz) because I know there are always tradeoffs-this machine trades off that computing power for a nice bright screen and good battery life.     The screen is WIIIIDE.  I love it, you can really fit quite a bit on it.   Movies look great on it too.     Speakers are okay and sufficient.   I can play Half Life and Counterstrike at full 1280x800 resolution at full speed. 
nice bright screen ,good battery life ,Movies look great ,
I have found this computer to be adequate for my needs (which are many and varied, depending on the mood) and I have no regrets in purchasing it.  I bought it about 6 weeks ago and it was flawlessly packaged and arrived in perfect condition.  I turned it on and it had simple instructions for starting it up and creating an account and getting everything settled.  Everything runs smoothly and easily and it is overall a pleasure to work on. 
perfect condition ,
  In any case, it turns out that absolutely nothing is wrong with this laptop. It has a beautiful Eco-Brite screen that renders sharp, vivid colors.   Of course, I needed to tweak some video drivers but for the most part I can play numerous games at 1024x768 (or 800x600).   The sound is good and the fit and finish are exemplary.   Top marks to Sony. 
vivid colors ,has a beautiful Eco-Brite screen ,sound is good ,
Overall extremely great product, Great for the price, I personally have had my Eee PC for the last 3 years. By far one of the best purchases i have made, Primarily used for college and Night classes. Very easy to use and get used to. A deffinite must have for bussiness meetings or students who dont want to spends thousands on a Laptop or Netbook. Very easy access to WIFI connections and the Internet. 
Very easy access ,
My old laptop was great, but it just did not have the power for handling digital editing of video.  This was my answer ~ to upgrade to a VAIO. 
power for handling digital ,
The laptop is by far the cheapest of the core duo's out there.  It offers plenty of tasking power.  I upgraded to 1028MB ram for $99.  Keyboard and mouse are pretty standard.  The media center works great.  Awesome laptop for the price. 
media center works great ,
Great mobile laptop in terms of weight, size ,features and performance.  Looks fantastic externally and the screen is outstanding.  As others have said it does run very hot at the front right hand side.  To the extent that you will be uncomfortable if actually sitting with it on your lap without a magazine under it.  Battery life is underwhelming.  No quality issues at all and no cause to need support. 
front right hand side ,
 compact size and battery life makes it great on planes.  After a year I still find the keyboard a little cramped.     Integrated bluetooth is great for mouse, gps etc.  good wi fi pickup. 
compact size ,Integrated bluetooth is great ,
The machine is attractive, well built and the 14. 1 screen bright and clear.   HP support refuse to recognise the problem and blame third party software and no updated drivers are available.  My advice would be to steer well clear of this machine until HP resolve the issue. 
machine is attractive ,
 The screen resolution is great.  I haven't tried out the webcam or mic, because I don't have any need for them but I would say that they probably work good too. I just don't know for sure.  I have no complaints about anything with this computer.  I use it for school mostly and it does the job just fine. 
screen resolution is great ,
It has got advanced word processing software which helps us to create tables of content and this software helps to handle elaborate footnotes. With Wireless Network at home this laptop helps us to browse the Internet from any room in the house without any wire connection. It has got a good battery life and it comes with a 3year warranty. The windows vista OS has got the face Management Centre which identifies the facial recognition of users face as the password for entering the system. Its gives pleasure for everyone who watches their faces while logging into their account. It can even lock the system if it determines that you stepped away. 
has got a good battery life ,
     Over all I like the layout, and keyboard.   The computer is light enough to carry around, but this is my first laptop so in comparison to a desk top anything is light.   I have had no major problems and the memory seems standard enough for my needs.   I have no problems accessing the internet. 
memory seems standard ,
 The machine is attractive, and easy to use.   The display 14 inch screen is high quality, and the keyboard is very comfortable.   The computer has frozen several times while installing new programs, but now seems to have have started to work smoothly.   Conclusion:  this is a fine machine for someone who wants basic word/email machine.   And OBTW, it does include a 3. 
machine is attractive ,keyboard is very comfortable ,wants basic word\/email machine ,
  Either way, it's obvious that Asus refuses to stand behind it.   I'm a reasonable person and I understand that manufacturing is imperfect.   But telling a customer they have to pay extra to get a unit that actually works is not only unacceptable, but downright fraudulent. I have no use for the worthless block of plastic for which I paid nearly $400 and have been forced to file a claim with my credit card company. No one should purchase an Asus product. 
'm a reasonable person ,
  Sad for a dual processor.       While I don't claim to be a computer guru, I know what I know, and this is a very light, very slim, sexy unit.   It seems to be very user friendly with wireless and I am still not sure about Vista.   There are many of my software packages that do not work with this,,,is anyone listening.   I feel like the proverbial guinnea pig. 
dual processor ,
amazing laptop but my mother board had amalfunction,if you have second hand mother board i wanna buy. since most of them have  a problem with it. 
amazing laptop ,
  Metal starts to corrode or oxidize as soon as it is exposed.   I can tell that this break, about . 375 inches in length, was oxidized fairly evenly along the entire length with less than a tenth of an inch being shiny metal (New break area).   It was simply a defective part.   If any one else had owned this, using it as a normal person uses a laptop, it would have broken on day 12. 
normal person ,
 Pretty satisfied until now.  Also, AMD dual-core runs reasonably fast, but HP should really provide a little bit longer battery life.    Some users were having problem with HP Pavilion dv6000 laptops about two issues.  One relating to the graphics adapter (nvidia 6150 or 7200 GeForce Go) and one relating to the Broadcom wireless chipsets.  However, so far didn't encounter any of these.    This laptop comes with Dual mic and and S/Pdif input. 
wireless chipsets ,
     100GB of hard drive and 1GB of RAM are truly enough for anything you could imagine - creating music, design, gaming, watching movies and so on.  Personally for me, as a DJ and a designer, it's an ideal match.      Graphics are great, however you would obviously need a better sound (I've got EACAN 2. 1), as most laptops go. 
need a better sound ,Graphics are great ,
This computer is great for whatever you need it for work, home etc.  it has a great camera with it.  It is fast durable and never freezes.  I have had this computer for almost 8 months and it is still going strong.  I write my work reports on it i use the webcam to talk to my family when im away.  All around just a great computer. 
computer is great ,great computer ,
  I compared it to many other similiar systems that were out at the time and this is the system I chose.   It has plenty of Ram and a large enough hard drive to hold all my information easily.  It came with an intergrated wireless network card that easily finds the network in my home and in my office all by itself.   I carry it on the road with me when I'm doing estimates and need to access my database in my office for proposals and client information.   Using my cell phone if needed I can access the internet anywhere I go and access any files that I have in my office without any problem at all.   The screen is huge compared to my old laptops and is easily viewable even in daylight conditions. 
large enough hard drive ,
No complaints. easy to use, friendly tech support and a 48 hour business class warranty. not to many other brands can boast about having everything in one neat package like this laptop provides. 
neat package like this laptop ,
  After two more critical failures and a few more frozen cursors I decided to call tech help.     Even he couldn't get it started. so advised me to return it for a replacement.   I haven't got the replacement yet, but it had better be good to make me feel more confident about what I have purchased.   Will report later on that one.       This is a disappointing review for me to make as the notebook has such great potential. 
call tech help ,notebook has such great ,
After one year and two months the Power Supply stopped working.  After two years had gone through 3 power supplies.  This is the lowest end Dell, just not worth buying, unless you plan on only having it for two years. 
just not worth buying ,
After a lot of research, I bought the Toshiba NB205 netbook for travel, and I'm very impressed with it.   The keyboard is very comfortable for a smallish computer, and the 9 hour battery life is great.  It's light and the screen is very easy to see.   This is a great netbook.   I was a tad nervous about switching from XP to Windows 7 but it's been  no problem at all. 
keyboard is very comfortable ,screen is very easy ,is a great netbook ,
  It has a crystal clear display which is easy on your eyes.   I also love the 700mhz processor which is screaming fast.   The DVD is also a great feature for watching movies on those long business trips.   I recommend this laptop to any serious computer enthusiast or business user. 
clear display ,love the 700mhz processor ,
  I have used the HP Pavillion g6 series laptop for couple of months now and so far everything is working just fine.   It’s a good size and weight to carry around and screen is big enough to perform pretty much any activity without being bothersome.   Also, I’d say the battery life is pretty good compared to other laptops. 
's a good size ,
 (I tested the 64-bit Skype in Kubuntu Jaunty Linux as well as in the pre-installed version of Windows Vista Home Premium).      The widescreen is 16:9, which is ok for widescreen movies, but actually doesn't seem as nice to me as 16:10 laptop screens.  Nevertheless, the extra screen real estate horizontally the wider means that I can see more applications when they are open simultaneously.     There is a disadvantage of the wider case: the keyboard is way to the left, because a number keypad is added to the right.  The touchpad is also off-center to the left, which is disconcerting to me. 
widescreen movies ,touchpad is also off-center ,
  Its so small, that it surprised me when it came in the mail - I said "wow, I didn't think it was going to be THAT small. "      I'm not particularly good to my equipment, and mine has survived 12 months of me beating on it, including 6 months in Iraq.   USB ports are convenient, battery holds up pretty well.     The lack of an on board dvd is annoying, but there's no way it could be as small as it is with a DVD player in it.   I bought a seperate one for just over $100 that works fine for when I'm not traveling.     For $1100 (price may have come down since I bought mine) its a great computer. 
USB ports are convenient ,great computer ,
    I've had it about a year now, and even purchaed it refurb.  at that point.  I'm considering adding the extended battery to it.      Let me add, the docking cradle ROCKS. 
'm considering adding the extended battery ,
 If these situations are within your needs, the Compaq Presario 2200 is going to do the trick for you at a very reasonable cost.  It comes loaded with Windows XP and the ability to take a full Microsoft Office pak with a quick download from the web.  With an  Intel Celeron M Processor 320 1. 3GHz, 512KB L2 cache, 400MHz FSB); 14. 
quick download from the web ,
Trial software not worth much except maybe Norton AV.  Could use hard copy manual although the disk has SOME info but seems to lack content on things I look up.  Hard getting use to built-in touchpad mouse (probably normal with all notebooks), use optical mouse at home.  Does get a little warm after awhile.  No 3 1/2 F/Drive.  Information re use of automobile cigarette lighter adapter does not exist. 
built-in touchpad mouse ,use optical mouse at home ,
I've been using this computer for two years in law school.  I use it everyday at least 10 hours.  Not only for taking notes in class, but I often watch DVD's on the 15 inch display.  The movies are crisp and look great.  I also use the CDRW quite extensively and have burned close to 50 CD's on this machine with no problems.        On more than one occasion this laptop has taken a beating and has kept on running. 
movies are crisp ,
Display options for the Inspiron 1525 include a matte finish 15. 4" Widescreen XGA . The keyboard on the Inspiron 1525 is fairly similar to the 1520.  The keyboard is firm with virtually no flex and the keys have excellent travel and cushion. The built-in HDMI is a very nice thing to have for those that want digital video output. 
keys have excellent ,want digital video output ,
My daughter also got a new Dell Inspiron 1525 from the Make A Wish Foundation last month and I have been able to test it a couple of times.   I am sure that the new 1525 is as durable as the old one, although it is slimmer and lighter, it looks sturdy compared to other brands.   It is a very fast machine and works very well with the Vista platform.   It is right up there with the more expensive brands and models. 
got a new Dell Inspiron ,
 This computer comes with Windows Vista which was new to me, but very easy to use.  I love the wide-screen.  It is very clear and I can have many different tabs open at the same time on this large screen. My favorite feature is the photo memory card slot.  You can take your card out of your digital camera and stick it directly into your computer to see your photos instantly. 
large screen ,digital camera ,
  Battery life is pretty good too.   I get about 2-3 hours on a full charge.   I noticed some slowness with Internet explorer 7. 0 so I downloaded the latest Firefox browser and that seemed to speed things up.   There are a lot of user forums for the Eee line and they are packed with good information if you want to hack this little pc.   You can also load most operating systems on it, including, Linux, XP, Vista, and there is even a hack for Mac OSX. 
full charge ,downloaded the latest Firefox browser ,
    With a beautiful design, it attracts a lot of looks.   It also has great 3d graphics, and a 14" widescreen.     With integrated Bluetooth and Wireless A/B/G you can always be connected.   I challenge you to find a better looking or performing laptop.    I purchased my W3V for $1899 from Asusdirect. com at http://www. 
beautiful design ,has great 3d graphics ,
  5)Weighs almost six and half pounds and with laptop case it can turn around to 10 pounds. So not good for frequent traveler with this laptop    Positives:  1)Cheap.  Bought for just 570 bucks  2)Good for movies, music and entertainment activities.  Reason being good sound system.  Sound system is equipped with built in sub woofer  3)Battery life is good.  In one recharge, you can work for two and half hours. 
Good for movies ,Battery life is good ,
I have been completely satisfied with my Toshiba laptop purchase.   This is not an impressive computer but for the price it is more than what I would expect.   I paid $499 with rebates for this computer and had second thoughts about paying more.   I was a little skeptical buying the cheapest one available. 
impressive computer ,
4 lbs it is very light and sleek.   It has a similar profile to the Sharp MM20 or Sony X505 but has a 12-inch screen instead of their 10.     Its does not have an internal optical drive and the primary battery is kind of short.   Neither of these hurt it very much and only requires a little planing before I leave your house.   I have ask myself &#147will I need the drive or secondary battery while I&#146m gone&#148. 
have an internal optical drive ,
I got it from company I work for in April of 2004, have been using it until now.      For business purpose, it performs very well, typing, emails, web-surf, making PPT, even drawing; seldom got frozen.       Weak heat circulation on the keyboard, after 4 hours, the left side of keyboard would get very hot.     I upgraded its ROM into 768Mb from 256Mb, it seems faster. 
left side of keyboard ,
 It comes with a Windows XP certificate of authenticity, but it does not come with a CD-version of Windows XP.  This notebook is a great value.  In addition to the DVD/CD-RW combo drive, there is a SecureDigital flash card slot, and 4mps infared. 59 Ghz processor combined with 256 MB DDR (double data rate) SDRAM makes routine functions quick.  Surprisingly, for a 16 MB graphics card, it performs very well. 
is a great value ,
I just bought a new Dell Inspiron 6000 fully loaded a few months ago and yes I payed a small mint for it.  Well needless to say I open the notebook the other day, pushed the power button and nothing happened.  At this time I logged into my preferred Dell account and they said I had 120 days left on my warranty.  So next I call Dell support and what a mistake that was. 
bought a new Dell Inspiron ,
  However, it can be bit heavy and bulky to carry around if you are a student (Hard to fit into a backpack as well).     The keyboard is comfortable to use but my brother's keyboard had some connection problems and I had to fix it.   The battery life is mediocre at best.   It was disappointing.  I think it stayed on for about 2 hours maybe even less on fully charged battery alone. 
keyboard is comfortable ,
33 AMD Athlon 4; extended life Li-Ion battery, PowerNow.   It includes a 3 month subscription to Norton Anti-virus.   Small footprint makes it easy to transport in a backpack.     The power is quite adjustable.   It includes both hibernate and standby modes.  The screen is very readable and the colors are vivid. 
extended life ,easy to transport in a backpack ,screen is very readable ,colors are vivid ,
I purchased one of these and within two years it was a paper weight.  I had the hinges replaced twice and they still cracked, a clear design defect.    I called tech support and was told I was SOL, when I asked to speak with a manager, I was refused.  I had to go online to get the HQ phone number(Located in Irvine, CA).  after emailing some photos they agreed to fix it for me but the repair only lasted for a few months before it had to be repaired again. 
called tech support ,
 That may be because I like the screen bright.  Also, the case which feels very solid scratches pretty easy.  Also, the finish has kind of become shiny and discolored in the places that my hand connects when I carry it around and I carry it quite a bit.     How could the design be improved.  Well, it would be great if the screen would pivot and reverse to form a tablet. 
feels very solid scratches ,be great if the screen ,
great computer a must have.  sooo buy it and listen to my new album.  and and and and and and and and and what. 
sooo buy ,
 The screen has great resolution, and is frankly better than our TV.  The appearance is crystal clear and gorgeous.  Overall, I think this is one of the best laptops you can buy on the market today.  I would highly recommend it to anyone interested. 
screen has great ,best laptops ,
  Its a speedy (1. 3GHz) lightweight business oriented machine.   It&#146s pretty durable, silver colored case.   The one yr standard protection was a deal when something went wrong.   I had it for almost 9 months and had to send it back, the power in (where you plug the AC adapter in) hook and shorted the adapter as well. 
lightweight business ,
 I've had nothing but trouble with mine, and abysmal lack of support from Compaq.  Next to useless in standard spec - RAM upgrade is mandatory for reasonable performance.  After 3 years of only home use, this computer has a useless battery (4th. ), intermittent lack of keyboard function, useless screen and total hard drive loss.  Would be useful as paperweight or boat anchor. 
standard spec ,
 It worked fine again for about 6 more months and just recently it stopped working again.  Both times the problem was with the videocard in the motherboard.  I am hoping that the product is under an extended warranty but if it isn't I will be without a laptop and without money to fix it.  When it is working it plays video fast, runs Photoshop CS3 efficiently, has multiple usb ports, and a sleek facade. 
has multiple usb ports ,
  However, my new R52 arrived DOA.   The power came on, the "thinkpad" screen came up, then nothing.   Tech support tried to help, but eventally took the maching back for repairs.   When It came back, it booted fine, THEN it would lock the keyboard/mouse after a few minutes. 
booted fine ,
 I purchased mine refurbished and have been using it for three year.  I wanted to upgrade several times but my wife would not let me.  She says it works why do you need a new one.  She is right - it works and works pretty well.  I would part with  this laptop only because of the monitor, I need an active TFT or something like that as I work with digital photos a lot. 
digital photos a lot ,
 It also comes with CDRW, DVD player, and wireless internet (802.  It is pretty flat and fairly lightweight, but it is kind of wide because of the wide screen.    The battery is pretty decent - with wireless internet on, I can get about 3 and a half - 4 hours out of it.  It is well ventilated and does not burn the tops of my legs. 
wireless internet ,battery is pretty decent ,
     Prices fluctuate wildly on the R40 model so be careful what you're buying.      Do yourself a favor and get the 15" screen and the Radeon 7500 graphics.     IBM makes the best keyboards on laptop computers.  They are the most ergonomically correct, best designed, most comfortable, etc.     IBM is also the only manufacturer to use the TrackPoint mouse, which surpasses the touch pad in terms of ease of use.  Most people have never seen or tried it, but once they have, they won't go back to a touch pad. 
best keyboards on laptop computers ,
    Called back May 15.   Told that it will be perhaps another two weeks before they KNOW if the part will be coming.   Did I mention that this was for an LCD SCREEN.     For a machine that is barely a year old, to have to wait a minimum of a month for such a standard part is beyond ridiculous.     Buy Dell.   I made the mistake of giving Toshiba another try after a long and happy history with Dell and their on-site warranty. 
Called back May ,
  It is very frustrating and Toshiba just says to take them back to the shop.   If these machines did not overheat they would be great.   They all have DVD/CDRW drives and were less than $2000 to buy.   They have large 14" screens which is great for a laptop. 
is great for a laptop ,
This laptop offers high performance.  Users are allowed to access broadband content and services with ease with this machine.  You can run just about any application that you want to with this machine; it's very fast.  The screen this machine comes with offers excellent detail.  Though the price is quite high it is worth it if you need a high performance laptop.  There is also a 3-year warranty offered by Sony which ensures you won't have to worry about this expensive machine becoming damaged. 
laptop offers high ,
Had mine six months.   Runs quieter than a Compaq.   Much better audio (Altec Lansing sound).   Well built.   Built in wifi works great.   Excellent service from HP. 
wifi works great ,
I have owned my Acer 2303WL Ci for 4 months now, and I am very satisfied with it.   It has performed admirably in all respects.   I did upgrade the RAM to 750 MB, which was a noticeable improvement and was easy to do.   Also, the USB ports are accessible and plentiful.   For the $699 I paid for this machine, it has been marvelous, and I would definitely recommend it. 
USB ports are accessible ,
Compaq's Armada 110 is a light weight, feature packed machine that offers a high level of convenience at your finger tips.     I did notice, however, a great deal of difficulty bringing the laptop to its full potential.       All-in-all, this is a smokin' machine with great potential, but use only if you get a good warranty with it. 
is a light weight ,
I think that this Toshiba laptop is a very sensible notebook because it is known to me that Toshiba make very good-quality computers.  There are many pros and few cons, but overall the Toshiba laptop is a good computer for all. 
Toshiba make very good-quality ,
  This computer is light weight which makes it easy to transport when I travel.   I have not subjected it to harsh conditions (such as Iraq) yet, but so far it has not given me any problems at all.   This makes it super fast and easy to turn the volume up and down.   This makes turning the wireless internet on and off super easy also.     -The Xbrite display is amazing.   It does not even look like you are looking at a LCD display. 
easy to turn the volume ,Xbrite display is amazing ,
 Worst of all, now they changed their website so there is no support for KDS notebook anymore.  I am wondering if it is because of the poor quality of their products.      It is relatively cheap.  However, considering the poor quality of the product, it is definitely not worth of buying.  Piece of junk. 
is definitely not worth of buying ,
I bought my 6557 in the winter of 2000 and at the time was the best deal compared to those Vaios and Dells.   It's got great unique looks and has a nifty app panel (that i dont use) with decent sound quality.   I wouldve liked more ram or at least not be limited by 196 max.   With new technology coming out, though, I wouldnt suggest buying the 6557 for $2k.   I've seen some VERY nice fujitsu's coming out in asia that should hit america eventually. 
was the best deal ,wouldve liked more ram ,
  I understand others might have a problem with this, though it doesn't bother me.     I'm writing this review from my Extensa right now, and my desktop background has disappeared.   That hasn't happened before, but it's little things like that that help keep the price low.     So I guess if you're okay with very irrelevant nuances like that, but want a generally great laptop, this is the one.     And, it has a Webcam, very useful. 
want a generally great laptop ,
This system came with everything needed to start up and go.  The touchpad works fine but for some reason an external mouse locks.      The system, even with the AMD 475mhz.  chip still moves at a good pace.  I easily upgraded my system to 192mb of RAM (factory installed 64mb) and that improved things even more.  System has a 6GB drive and a 24x CDROM. 
touchpad works fine ,external mouse locks ,
  I actually did not expect the laptop to remain as cool as it is.   The AMD Turion on my model is the ML-30, clocked at 1.   It has the ability to save battery by automatically running at 800 mhz when the extra power is not needed.   There is 512 MB of DDR ram, a 40 GB seagate hard drive, and an ATI video card which shares the memory.   While I do believe the specifications on my machine are low, please keep in mind that HP offers the computer in many configurations. 
extra power ,
  I actually play World of Warcraft in my spare time and it runs great.   I can actually play it in a window while I have several other apps open (like Outlook, Word, Excel, etc).   The screen resolution of 1400x1050 gives me plenty of desktop space.   The built-in wireless, built-in gigabit ethernet, touchpad, bluetooth, and DVD RW work fine.   The system has two PCMCIA which is very nice. 
runs great ,
33 ghz, but performs better because it performs more operations per clock cycle.   It has 256mb of DDR266 memory, with one available memory slot for future memory upgrades.   It has a 20gb hard drive, which isn't very big compared to the competition, but for most people I think that will be enough.   It has a DVD/CDRW drive that plays DVDs and burns CDs well.   The laptop comes with a built in 56k modem, and an 10/100 Ethernet port.   The system isn't exactly designed to be a gaming machine, but every game I own works well on it. 
future memory upgrades ,
  I have used it for more than 5 years, and it is in fine shape.   I have bought many computers and laptops, but no other has lasts more than 5 years.   This laptop is durable, and I have not needed to upgrade it at all.   The IBM Thinkpad came with a great warranty, and it does all the basic functions.   Ok, maybe it cant run the modern high graphics games that require an expensive graphics card.   But it is perfect for the internet user, college student, and/or business man. 
laptop is durable ,is perfect for the internet user ,
My work issued me this notebook to work from home with.   I personally would buy an IBM thinkpad or a dell but I got what I got.   This notebook is pretty light but it lacks power because of it's lack of RAM.   It is easy to upgrade the RAM but this isn't my machine. 
notebook is pretty light ,easy to upgrade the RAM ,
  What I mean by hybernation is that the computer will not turn.  I called Compaq numerous times fixing this problem until finally the process was engrained in my brain.   However, Compaq was always very helpful.  They have great customer service.   The next problem I had was blown speakers.  The computer has JBL speakers and I blew them. 
Compaq was always very helpful ,
 Always wondered how dell managed it.  Another thing i have realized is that always search the internet to find the best price.  One such place for dell deals is http://www.  I have seen some dell deals that cannot be found just by going directly to dell. 
find the best price ,
 The thin design and light weight come in handy carrying this computer to class every day, and the Pentium 4 is great for occasional gaming.   About the newest game on my system is the Army Operations game which will run at the highest resolution (1024x768) at about 30fps.   Almost everything is USB now anyway.   Other than that, this is very portable power. 
light weight ,thin design ,
  2 of my friends were lucky enough and return notebooks within 1 month after a purchase.   Since my problem took place 2 months later, I and 2 other friends couldn't return it, and it has happened 3 times through out year.  So, I personally ended up hiring an attorney.   The entire process has been taking over 5 months, and it's still not resolved yet.   If you don't believe me, try it yourself.   Good luck. 
Good luck ,
I purchased my Omnibook500 about a month ago and had owned several different notebooks by Toshiba, Sony, and IBM.  I use the notebook about 5 hours a day.  I use the notebook mostly for computation and field data analysis.  In terms of performance, Omnibook 500 has been acceptable.  Its light weight has been great for traveling. 
light weight ,
4 wide screen with a native resolution of 1680x1050 which is a good thing if you like the wide screen setup (I'm still getting used to it)  The 1. 8 Ghz Mobile Pentium is very robust, yet lacks the hardcore processing power of the desktops.   I purchased the 12 cell battery for my A4 and it seems to give me about 3. 5 hours depending on what apps I'm using.   The 40 gb hard drive is snappy and seems to stay quiet, even when I'm being demanding.   One thing I can't say enough about is the amazing sound system. 
is the amazing sound system ,
 In addition I looked for a good video card and the Radeon 9000 with dedicated memory beats the Sony Z1a and Dell offerings.  A call to AcerUSA verified that fact, although most TM800s in Europe come with Bluetooth.  The Acer person didn't know why -so now I'm waiting for the integrated Bluetooth module.    I found all the "heat-issues" to be humbug, the HD doesn't get too hot for your hand.  I read a lot of reviews where people said that the fan is too loud but in my experience it is never on.  The only time i hear the fan is when I first turn the laptop on during POST, when Windows takes over it's off. 
dedicated memory ,
  It has great volume control.  It would be just perfect except that the screen goes black unexpectedly.   This happens at least once per week.   I have to turn it off and then back on to "fix" the problem. 
just perfect except that the screen ,
This computer is amazing.  I found it to be just what I needed for all my school needs.  Since I'm not a crazed gamer it fit my needs and was fast enough for anything that an academic workaholic would need.  My only drawback was that the battery life was too short after only two years.  But good thing about it was that it was good enough and fast enough for just basic usage.  For the past two years I have had it and I found it useful for what I needed to do. 
computer is amazing ,
 I love this computer.  It's light and is very convenient to carry with me to work and on trips.  It has a very good support line with representatives who are always willing to assist you.  I haven't had any problems with my computer. 
very good support line with representatives ,
  The notebook gets very little use and has very few downloads on it.   Not utilizing 1/4 of its capabilities.   They maintain it's a hard drive problem, but with two new hard drives they have put in, they'll surely find something else this time.   Sorry, I won't buy another HP notebook. 
notebook gets very little ,
     I bought mine used off ebay for about 300USD (as of Aug 2005), which included the shipping from USA and the bag + accessories.  In terms of laptops, its a good deal.  The keyboard responds well, as does the two mice.     There are downsides to this PC.     The secondary ram slot on the board was broken somehow, I got the PC used so It may or may not be a limiting factor for you. 
good deal ,
 It has the standard USB ports which every computer needs and I use every port every day and none of them have failed.  I use it mostly to Skype my family back home and it is able to pick up and use wireless flawlessly to do so.  My favorite thing about it is the way the keys feel.  Its not hard to type, but you have to press the keys you mean. 
has the standard USB ports ,use wireless ,
  I was wrong.   I thought I would get a floppy plastic thing, but the unit is pretty substantial.   Full size keyboard (with a number pad, no less) full, bright display.   The display doesn't have a latch when you fold it down. It does all the basic computing chores: web browing, email, office tasks, watching/listening to video and audio. 
bright display ,
 The only downside for me personally was that it did not come with any of the insurance extras that would come from buying directly from IBM / Lenovo.      I must say that awhile ago I used another IBM thinkpad laptop for work (it was a t43 I believe) and really fell in love with the look and feel.  The slick black design is great, and the tough hard plastic case makes it feel indestructible.      As far as portability and traveling goes, this laptop is perfect for me. 
slick black design ,laptop is perfect ,
 Want Blu Ray and HD 1080p screen for Movies.  Was worried power would be too much for Airline adapters but it works on American.  Going to upgrade to 7 next week. Overall Movie performance has been very good.  Does  not run hot, does not stutter and picture quality is good. 
picture quality is good ,
 Basically, with LCD screens one wants set the machine at its "native resolution. " With this "fancy specs" laptop screen (such as 1600X .  resolution) this meant extremely tiny fonts & lettering.  Well, such a thing works fine if all you want to do is watch DVD movies but for general computer use (surfing web, writing documents, etc. ) everything is too tiny. 
native resolution ,thing works fine ,
I think this laptop price is very high for the students compare to its traditional feature.  But when comes to beautiful design consideration, I definitely recommend this laptop. 
beautiful design consideration ,
 Moreover the sound quality is also not as good as the notebooks of this price range have.  The battery also drains very quickly and lasts not more then 3 hours (6 cell).  The HD and blueray playback is good but the movie framerate is very low at some moments.  For true HD playback it must have dedicated graphics card.  If you are a business man than this brand isn. 
true HD playback ,
    My current problem is that the machine will not boot at all.   No video on the screen.   Cannot even get past the BIOS.   The machine is totally unusable now and will either have to be sent in (out of warranty) or trashed.   Too bad because I really liked the capability of this machine.   It was plenty fast enough and the SD slot was most useful. 
SD slot was most useful ,
   The T40 utilizes a brilliant M processor, that is light on fuel and high on octane.  My battery lasts more than 4.  That is with the screen at full brightness, and the processor screaming.   I am very impressed with this unit, and the only thing I would trade it for is another more potent ThinkPad.  Well done IBM.  You pulled another rabbit out. 
full brightness ,
I agree with what the previous reviewer stated and simply wanted to add one more voice that this is a great laptop.   Wonderful keyboard action, great screen, not too heavy, love the Pentium M series of chips, plus many other great features to numerous to mention.   I believe each comes with XP Professional as standard. another major benefit. 
is a great laptop ,great screen ,
  Having both a track point and glide pad is nice but what impresses me the most is the blue overhead nightlight.   This nightlight allows you to see the keyboard/track point area in the dark.   The memory and CPU are more than adequate for MS office apps, internet browsing, 3D games and graphics editing. 
pad is nice ,
 Buy something else or make sure and get a LONG freaking warranty.  My family won't use this computer anymore becuse of the elecrical and mousepad problems, Stay away from this one or get a LONG Warranty. 
Buy something ,
I have had this Laptop for a little over a year now & I have been very pleased with it. I have a small business & it is actually more computer than I need.   My one complaint is the Touchpad. It has never been a strong feature.  My last laptop was a dell That had a little joystick as a mouse so I thought it was me at first.  Time got away from me & I never sent it off under warranty. 
little over a year ,have a small business ,
Bought this notebook, Motherboard broke in 3 months.  Gateways Customer Service is absolutely the worst I have ever experienced.  Good luck speaking to a live person who can assist you.  Customer Service auto-attendant says they are attending to other customers and hangs up on you. 
live person ,Good luck ,
I was looking for a notebook for a child that has already graduated from college and moving out of state, we didn't want to pay a lot.  This notebook came at an excellent price with more bells and whistle than we could get any where else for the money.   We have had not one bit of trouble.   Thanks for making a good notebook we could easily afford. 
making a good notebook ,
I bought this computer as a college student and could not be more pleased with my selection.  I have not had any bad problems with the computer.  It runs very fast and works well with wireless internet.  The computer is not too heave so it is the perfect computer for students who need to take it around campus. 
wireless internet ,is the perfect computer for students ,
  Then I saw the compaq presario for $650 at Best Buy with almost all the same specs as my dell, why so cheap.   Well its got an integrated graphics card which takes up 64mb of the 512base of the system.   It does not have integrated wireless.  Fianally the battery lasts 2. 5 hours, whereas the dell lasted 4 hours.   But all in all, I use my computer for internet, watching an occasional DVD, and Microsoft office stuff and it performs wonderfully. 
have integrated wireless ,
This computer is great to have for on the go and out and about.  This allows you to download and burn music as you wish and gives you the availability to connect to the internet where ever there is a phone jack.  It is a nice perk but I would not buy this product to be your only computer or a multiple person computer.  This would be a nice thing to have but I would go for a regular computer for the major computer in the house.  I would probably not buy this if I had the money I would save to buy a nicer laptop.  I would tell my friends to do the same and suggest that you should do the same. 
computer is great ,buy a nicer laptop ,
  I turned off double touch and reduced the sensitivity which seemed to work, but I like double touch, so wahhhh.     This netbook is kinda crap.   I sold this on craigslist as it was too small and got a Dell Insprion 14, which is awesome.   I paid 379 for this netbook at Frys, probably should have gotten a cheaper one. 
like double touch ,
 It deserves my love.  You have the all-Compaq-available easy-access buttons, and you can easily reprogram them.  Monitor is bright, crisp and clean images, better than the monitors of many other popular laptop brands. bat and Config. sys files, a thing not everyone knows how to do. 
Monitor is bright ,
  As I final desperate act, I clicked the blue button, selected "Restore Factory Settings" and - Voila.   It has reformatted and reinstalled Windows XP.   Everything was restored (Thank God I back up data regularly- and have all my disks from programs I bought.   Also- was able to go on-line and reload downloads of programs I purchased on-line as well as drivers. )      Thank You IBM/ Lenovo  for the little blue button. 
reload downloads of programs ,
A very affordable and very easy laptop to use and own.  Can come loaded with extra features or get the base model.  Suggest getting one with the CD/RW DVD-RW  combo.   Comes with Windows XP loaded and ready to run.   Technical support is excellent. 
very easy laptop ,Technical support is excellent ,
5gb), writes pretty fast  the resolution and picture quality is good to watch a movie or edit a movie, sleek and wide, it has a memory card reader.   The problem i felt was     1.  tv output, you need to have tv convertor to watch the dvd in big screen and to play games    2.  the sound output is very low , need to have external speakers. 
picture quality is good ,have external speakers ,
  In addition, the Armada's and the Evo's are built like high-tech tanks.   I just retired a laptop and went through the process of researching everything on the market.   I like a track pad for many reasons and hated the point sticks because they usually get in the way and they are so imprecise.   So I bought the newest Evo 610C and I am so happy with it.   It feels solid as a rock and was easy to break in. 
feels solid as a rock ,
A Sleek Build Laptop with good overall performance  and look.   512 MB RAM makes it more speedy.     3 USB Ports and Firewire Port as Well    Only Drawback for me so far is poor sound level of  Build-in Speakers. 
good overall performance ,
 Under normal working conditions, it can last up to 4-5 hours.  I often travel and use this laptop as my personal DVD player.  Not once battery died before end of the 2 hr movie.      Sound is also very good for the built in speakers. 
Sound is also very good ,
  I bought the pro thinking I would get better quality and functionality.       Overall my system works great.   It's not too heavy and it looks great.   It works well as a presentation tool.   I bought it with Windows XP Professional and it did not come with a disk so I could access my second user license.   It was offered to me for $20 from Microsoft if I want the disk; again not too happy. 
system works great ,
I have been using my 1730CDT for about a week now nonstop, being as it has more power then my desktop for the next 3 days.     Overall, I think the 1730CDT is a great machine be it for corporate or school use, especially for it's price. 
is a great machine ,
 Until I saw some of the deals Toshiba was offering in regards to this particular model.  I ended up getting it for a little over $700 after rebates.  For a little over the going rate for a portable DVD player, I got a fully functional laptop that more than meets my needs.  With 256 MB of memory and a 56K modem standard all that is left to add is perhaps an ethernet card, though there are 2 PCMIA slots ready and waiting.  A pair of USB ports in the rear as well as a sidemounted port means an easy hookup for either printers, scanners, or in my case a joystick. 
portable DVD player ,easy hookup for either printers ,
Two weeks later my Pavilion just stopped working.   Once again I set out to contact the HP service center in India.   To make a very long story short, I had to file a formal complaint in the local Better Business Bureau before I could get them to respond.   To be fair to HP they did offer to refund me on the extended warranty I purchased. 
make a very long story ,
My personal experience was great with this.  I gave this a 4-5 because of the heating issues and outdated hardware inside of a 2010 system.  If you want a semi-speedy laptop and you dont play hardcore games than this is for you.  I would like more data space with the "hd" but you can always get a usb or external hd for resonallbly cheap.  And the speakers are nice and crisp and even has good base. 
personal experience ,speakers are nice ,
 The keyboard is very firm and responsive, with a nice layout.  It's got all the ports you need and everything is easily accessible.  It's really quiet, especially while watching DVDs and it runs relatively cool too.  The pointer devices work fine for me, but I usually connect a mouse anyway and disable the touchpad. 
everything is easily accessible ,runs relatively cool ,pointer devices work fine ,
The laptop is great, no problem s with it.  Its nice and fast, graphics are good and can handle alot.  I picked this laptop becasue of the features and price, compared to some others.  I got mine from www. com its called the Mayhem G4. 
laptop is great ,graphics are good ,
 the 500mhz processer has handled all the software i have used including photoshop and quarck.    the orinico wireless card works like a charm in linux and windows.  and has comein very useful while travelling.     laptop works great for watching movies.       i even have plugged the headphone jack into my car stereo and used it listen to all the audio books i downloaded while drving across the u. 
wireless card ,audio books ,
I loved my KDS laptop and I want it back; however, tech support is not available for this laptop.  All I need are the parts to fix the screen or a new screen altogether, but there is no tech support or place to buy the parts.  I am greatly saddened at the lack of customer service/tech support on a good product.  I do not recommend any one buy a kds laptop because of the lack of tech suport. 
good product ,
 A memory card reader and a right-hand number pad a two extra perks- it does help on a laptop.  A large widescreen display is great for movies in 16:9 ratio.  The critiques lie mainly in aesthetics and practicalities.  It is not the thinnest of machines, and is also slightly too heavy (even without a battery in. 
large widescreen display ,
 Good value for the money.  Didn't get too hot, not anything unbearable.  Battery lasts 2. 5 hrs, not as long as I would like, but as expected from a 3-cell battery.  If it's a problem, get the 6-cell.  The dvd/cdr can get a bit noisy. 
Good value for the money ,
  Performance is good.   Although when I tried to rip a DVD, it took 2 hours.   Not sure what's up with that.   I ripped the same DVD on my 1. 
Performance is good ,
it has a wide and clear screen.  very handy and comfortable to used the keyboard.  cheap amount but with higher quality.  faster speed of the processor.  love the features on this laptop device. 
clear screen ,comfortable to used the keyboard ,
  The sound quality of the speakers is excellent - I often use it as my stereo when I am doing chores/tasks around the house.  It's attractive casing is definitely a plus, and I've found that it has everything I expected and more.     The PC comes standard with Windows Vista, which I am still getting used to.  I just do not know how to activate that control yet. 
's attractive casing ,
It's a great and reliable machine for essential tasks.  Light and portable - the way laptop should be.  No-nonsense design which helps you to operate this unit easily.  I've enjoyed working with it and think that this is a very nice laptop even today, in 2010. 
is a very nice laptop ,
 Primarily, it can run any dos based game at perfect speeds.  With USB 2. 0 (PCMCIA adaptor) compatibility, it can  be used for any application within a Pentium computer range.          Durablity: A laptop that is over 10 years old and still runs well.  Not many laptops of that age are in working order. 
Not many laptops of that age ,
 If word processing is going to be a regular part of your normal uses for your new laptop, I highly recommend checking this baby out.  The keys have great feedback and presence.  I really can't think of a single aspect of the keyboard that needs improvement.  The backlight can be a little blinding if you are viewing the laptop from too shallow an angle.  You can see the LED light source under the keys unless your eyes are positioned pretty much above the keyboard, and it can be a little distracting.  It's not a huge issue, but I felt it was worth mentioning. 
keys have great ,
We got this when I went to my new job in 2003.   This is a great laptop, you can do lots of things on it, and it is good for work.   It also has a plug so you can plug it in to a computer.   I think this is a great laptop. 
is a great laptop ,is a great laptop ,
I have used this notebook extensively for business travel over the past year and found it to be a poor quality laptop.  Docking, undocking, suspend and standby are all unreliable functions. 
past year ,
 The speakers could be better but the installed Realtek software has adjustments to improve the sound.  The screen is great for editing and looking at photos.  Wifi and the DVD burner all work well.  I use it as a desktop computer. 
screen is great ,
     I just received my brand new IBM Thinkpad R40 (model 2682-HU2).  This laptop compared to my previous IBM iSeries laptop is night and day.  It has all the perks such as a lighting fast processor, DVD/CD-RW combo drive, and 802. 11b wireless built-in.  The screen is large and 14 inches and display text and DVD movies clear as possible. 
11b wireless built-in ,screen is large ,
 The F45 series Qosmios are now playing some classic R&R in my room and it sounds great coming from a 15.  The fit and finish is excellent as well as the ergonomics.  They have everything I was hoping for in a bang for the buck system.  Before making a purchase in the $1250. 00 to $1600. 
sounds great ,
This is the best choice if you are looking for average performance and design  I bought my first HP notebook just few days ago and I love it.  Impressive design, comfortable keys and wide touchpad.   My first light notebook with a battery duration of almost 3 hours.   A bright and clear TFT LCD for smooth movie playback.    Loaded with everything you need, still a very thin, light and portable one.   You need to add more RAM, Win XP consumes a lot of that. 
Impressive design ,wide touchpad ,comfortable keys ,
    It has an Intel Celeron 500 MHz CPU, a 12. 1-inch TFT display, 64 MB RAM, 6 Gb hard drive, internal 24X CD-ROM internal 56k modem, 2 usb ports and one PCMCIA slot.   It does lack serial ports and the external floppy drive is sold seperately.     I must say that I really like my Thinkpad. 
internal 56k modem ,external floppy drive ,
I researched laptops for almost a year before finding this one.  It has everything I wanted and more for a price that was close to $1,000 less than other brands.  I've had it for 3 weeks and have had no problems.  The things I like best are its speed and large, bright display screen.  I wasn't sure I could live without a mouse but the touch pad was easy to get used to and I love the scroll bar. 
bright display screen ,touch pad was easy ,
 But once you turn this baby on, it&#146s turned on ;-) My computer hasn't bombed once yet.  If you are having problems I'd suggest getting added memory.      The battery lasts pretty well too.  The one reason I would really consider buying this is because of its beautiful 15in  screen.  The one reason I wouldn't buy it would be because its not as sexy as some of the other sleek products in the market. 
beautiful 15in screen ,other sleek products in the market ,
This is a great computer, very fast.   However when I first purchased it it froze often, but after upgrading the BIOS and reseting the RAM that problem was fixed.   This machine performs well; from games, to Microsoft applications and photo shop.   And for the price this computer is well worth it.   Only problem that I myself have is the 20 gig hard drive, even though it isn't that small I would have prefered a larger one. 
is a great computer ,price this computer is well worth ,
  My understanding is that IBM is the ONLY company that makes their own laptops.  EVERY other company is making them all over the world, and manufacturers are just stamping the names on them : Dell, Gateway etc.   Granted, IBM facility may be in Hungary or China, yet it's IBM facility not some guys in garage.   This is the best laptop I ever owned and too bad this january 2004 they stoped the production. 
is the best laptop ,
RB556UT    Great little package, but touch stick could be a little better like IBM one.     Great power, fast hard drive, good video card (256MB), amazingly good speakers.   Very difficult to find fault, especially when compared with competitors.   Now superceded with new Intel chipset.   Good DVD-RAM drive. 
little package ,be a little better like IBM ,amazingly good speakers ,fast hard drive ,Great power ,new Intel chipset ,
  (Shows really nice movies).     However, considering that the laptop has a 1. 4 gig CPU, I think it runs rather slow.   I have a desktop with a 1. 4 Thunderbird and there is no comparison. 
Shows really nice movies ,runs rather slow ,
For a good price and nice multimedia features I was drawn to this Sony unit.  When there was a problem with the power supply after about 45 days that's when I ran into trouble.   First I called the 800 number and I was told the average wait time is about 30 minutes.  I tried for two more days then gave up. 
good price ,nice multimedia features ,
 This laptop was a great investment because it offers me so much value and very importantly consistent performance.  I use the DVD drive to watch movies on weekends and it is very easy to use.  The floppy and DVD/CD drives conveniently load from the front, and the volume control is nicely located to the side.  Although I have separate speakers, the laptop's speakers are very good, even better than the speakers I have on my old desktop. 
speakers are very good ,
 It even came with a free year of internet.  The keyboard is easy to punch the keys and the screen is huge.  It comes with windows millenium which is yah plain awesome.  The dvd player plays my movies flawlessly and is perfect for my road trips on busses etc for college. 
keyboard is easy ,
My screen went blank after I had it for a short time and I'm having problems with customer support.   The responses from customer support have not been helpful.   The price is not worth the headache.   I would recommend purchasing another laptop brand. 
price is not worth ,
Simply put, this is the best laptop I have ever encountered in 8 years in the IS field.   Stable, sleek, quick, and reliable are all words I would use to describe this computer.     The monitor is large and bright enough to eliminate the need for an external monitor at work.   The internal DVD and floppy mean no extra cables or switching drives. 
is the best laptop ,monitor is large ,
When i first need it a laptop i thought i should buy a pink viao sony or and apple.  But after a few seconds i decided to compare them . And guess what i was going to make a bad choice.   Because the HP laptop was so much better it had more memory and it was at the same price.  And thats when i realized that you shouldnt settle for the brand thats expensive . 
HP laptop was so much better ,
I thought acer laptops are good.  But when i bought Acer TravelMate 4000 I found its speed slow.  And After 2 Years its Hard Drive Got Dead.  And i am not able to get warranty.  I studied the market if i'll buy New Hard Drive of Any company like Seagate, Fujitzu,etc.  i will get 5Years Warranty. 
acer laptops are good ,
  You cannot change the resolution so everything is tiny, all the time.   They check it out and told me it cannot be changed.   Or I should say, you can change the resolution so that everything is the right size on the screen, but then it's blurry.     I had a huge problem returning it as well, I wouldn't recommend Best Buy to anyone either.     This is just the short sweet version of what I think of the computer.   It was really a nightmare. 
recommend Best Buy ,
 I use it everyday for 2 years, although I do use  it with AC power all of the time.  I get about 30 seconds of internet browsing and playing simple games when I do use the  battery, and a bit less for streaming video.  Wireless is amazing everywhere and  easy to configure.  I like the wide screen and numeric keypad, and the  wrist rest area is not the ultra shiny black (fingerprint magnet) that  some of the laptops have. I run Photoshop CS3/Adobe Bridge along  with Firefox and have never had a crash. 
playing simple games ,like the wide screen ,
  The screen is 15 plus inches and is great when watching movies or tv shows in bed without squinting the eyes.  The mouse pad is a good size.   It also has a lock so if you are a cluts like me you won't click you self away or close a page.    I thought it would take me awhile to get used to the keyboard.   The keyboard is not small. 
is a good size ,
  I have upgraded the memory from 128 to 256 and runs very smooth.  I will be upgrading the harddrive soon which currently has less 12gigs.   Thats another thing upgrading is so much cheaper.     One thing I didn't like is the battery which drains to fast. 
thing upgrading is so much cheaper ,
 The biggest problem has been the CD/DVD drive which has an annoying tendency to pop open of its own accord.  DVD's don't play very well, and have a tendency to stop and jump during playback.     Other than that, the features all work as advertised.  The battery lifetime is decent, about 2 or 2 1/2 hours with the wireless modem enabled.  The LCD screen has very good appearance. 
wireless modem ,battery lifetime is decent ,LCD screen has very good ,
I got one of these but with the larger drive and 256 megs of ram.     Absolute best buy I've ever got when it comes to pc's.     Would I buy another.   If I had the money, I'd buy two ;). 
larger drive ,Absolute best buy ,
I desperately needed a laptop in order to write my papers away from any distractions I have at the apartment (10 ppl, 6 of them sorority girls).  I believe in highly portable laptops with just enough features to type my papers, surf the internet and listen to mp3s while away from home.  I began my search with the Sony Vaio C1 Picturebook, but was immediately turned away from its high price tag.  Upon searching Ebay, I came across this laptop.  I was impressed highly with its features.  The touchscreen is really helpful most of the time (sometimes holding the stylus in your teeth gets annoying when you go to start typing again). 
high price tag ,
This laptop is amazing.  It comes with a webcam and microphone embedded in it, a dvd/cd burner, an 8-in 1 memory card reader, and multiple USB connector ports.  It's easy to use, once you start the computer a menu pops up to help you navigate around until you know how to use it.  It comes equipped with Windows Vista and it is super fast.  I uploaded a few games of the Sims and it hasn't slowed down the speed of the computer. 
laptop is amazing ,multiple USB connector ports ,
This is a really good laptop.   I am in fact writing this review on one right now.   It is modestly priced for a laptop with this much memory, and computing power.     It is powerful enough to do some heavy imaging, and light gaming.   (which is what I use it for).   But its also good for plain old email, and web browsing. 
is a really good laptop ,
I've been using the laptop as a secondary computer for a while, and have found it to be very reliable.   I did install XP Pro on it shortly after receiving it, and the upgrade went extremely smoothly.   The speed of the computer is great, and I love the built in wireless connection.   I'd recommend a minimum of 512 MB of RAM, but go for more if you can. 
wireless connection ,speed of the computer is great ,
  I am a touch typist, and now I'm having trouble finding certain keys on a regular keyboard, after only having this thing for 3 weeks.   Constant typos, can't find apostrophe & question mark easily, forget using the shift key without looking down.   The screen is too small to comfortably read.   Couldn't get it to hold resolution settings, so had to get help from Dell. 
screen is too small ,
 We were given one of the first models of this computer and till this day still runs good.  When we first got this newer model of the Sony Vaio computer, We mainly used it to take on consulting jobs to clients.  We show up at a client with all web development software and code libraries on this little system.  It comes with an adapter to shoot the computer feed to a huge monitor.  Most of the times all the clients needed to do was to give us a monitor if we where working long hours there. 
runs good ,
nice over-all computer, guick, nice to play games with.  very affordable.  nice battery life.  could use more memory but for some applications. 
nice over-all computer ,nice battery life ,
Bought this notebook 5 months ago from Staples and have been very happy with it since.   It replaced a 6 year old Dell full size laptop.  It's secondary purpose is to allow me to work out of the office on occasion using the full suite of Microsoft Office programs.   I chose this size for traveling convenience while maintaining a large enough monitor to view images and documents easily. 
full size laptop ,maintaining a large enough monitor ,
  Sony support refused to do anything about it.   Always have your ac adapter handy.   The power cord is also short.   Therefore, you will find yourself sitting a few feet away from a power outlet most of the time.     Impressive screen size for the price. 
power cord is also short ,Impressive screen size for the price ,
 There are fans in the machine itself and in the cord, and both are almost constantly kicking on and off.  I've never had it on my lap without a barrier of some sort so I can't vouch for the heat, but the fans make it seem like there is a furnace brewing.  My other concern was the weight.  In comparison to many other notebooks this thing is a beast.  Don't expect to comfortably walk around with this for a long period of time.  Not unless you're Mr or Mrs Olympia at least. 
many other notebooks this thing ,
This computer is not a powerhouse desktop replacement.   It is a very compact and light notebook computer that does very well with a good battery life.   This computer ships with no software.     The hardware is great. 
good battery life ,
  I thought the small screen was going to be a problem, but the clarity is outstanding and I have had trouble using my large screen display.   My wireless connections are fast.   This outstanding laptop has all the memory I need.   The keyboard is perfect for my small hands, since I am a 10 finger typist, it might be a problem for larger hands. 
large screen display ,thought the small screen ,wireless connections ,keyboard is perfect ,
i've had this laptop for 2 years and it shuts down every time i use the laptop.   it over heats and shuts down.   not a good design.   also the mouse and keyboard is not stable.   the mouse jumps around because the laptop case is flexible. 
good design ,
I went looking for a new laptop to replace my IBM X21 and came across the W2 almost by accident.  It was lighter, faster and had a CD/DVD drive in it that made it a clear performer over the other machines I looked at.  The suspended hard drive and metal chassis were also attractive as I use my laptop a lot for technical support at professional car races.  I does get quite warm while charging so I have gotten in the habit of charging it when I'm not using it to respect the Li-On battery.  The WiFi works extremely well and was easy to set up. 
metal chassis were also attractive ,
   I also bought the optical USB mouse.  That is a must.  The touch pad is nice but you have to do a lot of touching to move it across the screen.  The scrolling feature on the touch pad is nice. 
touch pad is nice ,touch pad is nice ,
    In the past, I owned a Dell Latitude (see my review on that little number) and would buy another IBM computer in the future.  I was also able to override the track mouse by hooking up my external mouse.  (Which by the way is a Dell, but made by Microsoft.  Funny how that works. )    The Fan    The fan for this machine is quiet.  Much quieter than on the Dell Laptops. 
external mouse ,
REALLY OVER ALL ITS A NICE MACHINE i THINK THE VIDEO DRIVER HAS A PROBLEM. NEEDS NOT LET USER HAVE ACCESS TO TO MANY SETTINGS OR MAKE SURE THAT WHAT THEY WANT TO DO.  WHEN THEY MAKE ANY CHANGES. MAKE SETTINGS CHANGES VERY BASIC EASY ACCESS. 
BASIC EASY ACCESS ,
I currently own one of these and they are a great invention, it has everything from fingerprint reader to a built in camera.  Its compact, very light, and its fits anywhere.  The battery life thought is not long at all it last about two to four hours so as long as your not out for more than that your fine.  Its also very pricey its not worth it unless you use it everyday other than that wait til the price drops.  There's really nothing i hate about this product other than i wish i could use it a lot more.  It has a very large memory drive, you can store so much into this little PC. 
has a very large memory drive ,
 I compared battery life and at the time when I purchased it, the s10-2 had the best battery.  And I can't complain about. I do have a problem with the sound.  The speakers are not loud enough. 
had the best battery ,
Don't be fooled by bogus reviews.   I purchased the laptop shortly after joining the NAVY.   After bootcamp, e-mail became one of the most affordable methods of communication.   This toshiba satellite was tops.   Don't purchase this laptop with the expectations of HIGH END graphics gaming, none the less, it will still perform for you.   My deepest recommendations for this setup are 2 things that will make AN ENTIRE WORLD OF DIFFERENCE. 
deepest recommendations for this setup ,
    The dell insprion 1000 does not have an internal wilress card so you have to use a pc card / pcmcia wireless card.   It's not a bother to me but it could be to some as the card does stick out on the side of the unit.     Now, for the great features it has a dvd / cdrw combo drive which is nice to have.   It als comes with 256 mb of ram and a 30 gb hard drive which will suffice for most users. 
wireless card ,
 Then the random shutdowns began.  Then I noticed that it shut down regularly when I was doing high-cpu tasks such as video rendering or games.  I bought a cooling pad which helped somewhat but it only prolonged the time before it shut down to about an hour.  It can only be used reliably for browsing.  And yes, I've updated all drivers to the max, including the BIOS. 
video rendering ,
04 runs very well on it.   Not a lot of tweaking needed.   Also, fingerprint reader and web cam both work.   For the money I'd say this is a great machine. 
is a great machine ,
I cannot locate how to turn down the volume. apparently this is only done through the software, and the battery life is very short.  Of course an upgraded battery is available and also a spare can be purchased.  I am truly amazed at the amount of hardware the manufacturer is able to pack in to this machine.  I would purchase a second one, but I am going to hold off until the new Microsoft operating system is available. 
new Microsoft operating system ,
  This laptop if very nice.   I do have some write to memory . exe errors on boot sometimes but otherwise it runs great.   I would recommend it to others.   It is fast, feature rich and really a great desktop replacement.   Otherwise this is a great machine. 
runs great ,is a great machine ,
  However, Gateways customer service was fantastic.  They replaced the battery with no fuss, and I've not had any problems since.   OK so the Sempron from AMD isn't the worlds fastest processor at 2GHz, but as far as I'm aware, its faster than it's Pentium counterpart.  If you want a faster processor then you'll need to go for one of Semprons bigger brothers offered by AMD.   I pretty sure that AMD isn't all that big here in the UK, and in my opinion its to our loss.  Given the choice, I'd go for AMD over Pentium any day. 
Gateways customer service was fantastic ,
I bought the Sony PCG-GRS614MP to use exclusvely to run my test equipment on trains (test train OVH).   Battery life, good display and ease of use keyboard are essentual.     The weight carry from airport to airport proved irksome; though any laptop with the same spec.  would not be appreciable lighter.   The keyboard; though generous in size and spacing; I felt I had to "push a long way" too long a travel. 
good display ,
There is no doubt that T21 is a good laptop.  It is more than likely to be better than even your average desktop and I am using it as both.  However, while using it, I've encountered several problems that should't occur at this price range:    1.  Using the port replicator, sometimes the laptop just won't recognize the fact that it has an external monitor, keyboard and mouse.  Other times it will only identify one of them and on occasion, everything will seem to work, but the external keyboard will just be very slow (i.  the key repeat rate becomes very low). 
is a good laptop ,has an external monitor ,
 Right out of the box it booted up no problem, very fast and the applications are fast as well.  Has everything on it that she will need.  The keyboard is excellent, easy to use.  I won't get to use it. 
keyboard is excellent ,
  Bring it to an authorized dealer - even if its out of warranty they will replace the system board and install a video card clip.     http://csd. com/cgi-bin/tais/su/su_gaspLocator. 
install a video card clip ,
 Everything that you are going to need on a daily basis is out in the open and easy to find and open.  The web cam on this computer is pretty good my last laptop was a dell and did have a little better quality of camera but is pretty good.  So far this Toshiba laptop has exceeded my expectations.  I would recommend this laptop. 
computer is pretty good ,little better quality of camera ,
  The operating system is Windows XP Home Edition, which is the easiest Windows to use.   Operating system choices ranged from Windows 2000 to XP Home or Professional.     Overall, this is a very good computer.   I bought a new battery for it, and increased the RAM to 1 Gigabyte. 
is a very good computer ,
  The built-in mic is a little on the quiet side so I would recommend an external mic/headset combo.   The screen is a good size and overall the laptop is lighter than my previous one.   The Acer boots quickly and is great for multi-tasking.   The 500gb harddrive is a nice touch as a lot of the laptops in this range tend to be 320gb. 
is a good size ,
The models are nice but they have many problems with the design of the circuitry.   Mine started to shutdown after 6 months I bought it.   Sony was unable to fix the problem and denied was their fault.   There are people starting a business due to the high number of problems, see www. vaioshutdown. 
models are nice ,
  I was wrong and disappointed.   The keyboard has been replace because the mouse would track on its own.   The top cover was replaced because it was warped.   The LCD screen needs to be replaced since it appears to be going out.   I thought mine might be a lemon, but one of my partners purchased the exact same notebook and is also having terrible problems.   My sister Dell with was $1000 dollars less is more reliable as is my other partner's Compaq. 
top cover ,
 If you can pick one up for $300 or so; do it now, and you'll never regret it.   I can't think of a better bargain in today's world.   I bought a Linksys wireless modem that allows me to move around without tangling cables.   This is an essential for me.   All in all, you can't go wrong with this notebook unless you get a factory lemon. 
wireless modem ,
 If you buy the d600 series port replicator you can also hook up 2 monitors to expand your desktop screens.  Keep in mind you will need a VGA and a DVI monitor for this to work.     I love the built in wireless card, it comes in handy when travel is a factor to consider.  Some models have the bluetooth option - I have seen these models, but can only report the history I have seen of faulty blue tooth cards. 
wireless card ,
 Altho this 1. 6 GHz AMD Turion 64 ML-30 processor model has been discountinued in favor of the 1.     I've had it only a week now and am still learning how to use WinXP Home Ed, but this light notebook with 802. 11b/g wireless LAN is a joy. 
11b\/g wireless LAN ,
 The keyboard is the best I have ever used, laptop or desktop.   The start up time is surprisingly quick.   Battery life is moderate to good at 4hrs.   Quiet, almost silent operation 95% of the time. 
start up time is surprisingly quick ,good at 4hrs ,
  Compaq told me I might need to download some new drivers.   I think the keys are even HOTTER NOW.   This drives me crazy, and no this is not my first laptop computer I've had several other Compaq's that were very good computers.   Maybe you should try it out in the store before you take it home.   So I'm typing as fast as I can so that you can read this computer is not worth investing any time or money in.   Have a good day and thanks for reading about my computer with way too many HOT KEYS. 
download some new drivers ,were very good computers ,computer is not worth ,Have a good day ,
It took me 4 days and three trips to the store to select this system.    -rock solid  -vista works like it should.   -fast speed  -blue ray player  -solid design  -very quiet    a must buy. 
solid design ,fast speed ,
 The design and location of the charger port and the power button add to the stylishness, but because of their independent structure they are fragile.  If you never drop your laptop, this might not be a problem for you.  But if you do, either one of these can break off, leaving you in an awkward position.  The charger port broke off on mine, and as a result I was unable to back the laptop up before sending it to be fixed.  All of my data was gone, and I had to install and download everything from scratch.  Also, the speaker quality is a bit lacking and sounds rather anemic. 
sounds rather anemic ,
I've owned the 7405 for several months and it's done everything well.  The software package is adequate to perform most tasks.  The hardware has worked flawlessly.   The computer has proved to be a good value. 
be a good value ,
I've got this laptop after a poor performing computer, and the GX-620 is stunningly performant for what it costs.  It runs Assassin's Creed, Call of Duty 5, and the like at 1680x1050, all graphics and shadows high, without a lag, or almost. The turbo and eco modes integrated in the computer are nice and useful.  The laptop is light, compact and slim.  Some might not like the red borders, but i do. 
computer are nice ,laptop is light ,
 Being self-employed and needing a laptop, the L2000 happened to serve my needs and was in a similar price neighborhood as others I looked at.   I decided to make the purchase and lend support to the LiveStrong organization at the same time.  Once I jettisoned a few programs I no longer use along with some other clutter, it's running faster again.  Bright, clear, large screen.  Ports are on the side of the computer rather than the back.  This configuration makes it much more convenient to use, no more turning the computer around to plug something in. 
large screen ,
Display is crisp and bright, although some black text seems somewhat fuzzy, angle setting makes a huge difference to viewability.     Very portable with good specs for the price/size of the machine.  Build quality is fairly good.  Most factory OS's I've seen are crammed full of "bundled software" that is nothing more than light or time bomb demo versions.  This one only had ZoneAlarm, RecoverIT & Cyberlink Power2Go. 
Display is crisp ,
Nice overall computer.   Small and lightweight with an attractive magnesium allow case.   Screen is bright with windows XP.   CD burner/DVD combo works well. 
Nice overall computer ,attractive magnesium ,Screen is bright ,
I have owned this computer for over a year.  The performance is good, the wireless card works great, the weight is good and small size really helps.  The only downside is the small size and slightly odd layout of the keyboard.  It is ok once you get used to it, but works better for people with small fingers. 
works great ,wireless card ,performance is good ,small size ,weight is good ,is the small size ,small fingers ,
 The mouse pad is just sensitive enough and is easy to use.  The web camera is very standard and works just fine.  It occasionally doesn't turn on but a restart of the video program can generally fix that.  It has a good amount of storage for a casual computer user. 
works just fine ,
I ordered the M320x Plus for it's slim size, light weight, and long battery life.  I got the UltraBright screen, extended battery (which extended out the back), CD-R/DVD-R drives, standard 512 MB RAM, 80 GB Harddrive.     The notebook was great -- everything I needed, nothing I didn't.  I would've liked it to run a little faster, specifically with programs like Adobe Photoshop, Acrobat, and Dreamweaver.     With about 3-5 programs open, the battery lasted 4 hours, and up to 5 if I just used a simple Word Processor. 
light weight ,notebook was great ,used a simple Word Processor ,
    The T and X series come with 3-year warranties, and that I'd HIGHLY recommend.   My last Thinkpad went through 4 LCDs and it was nice to just walk in and have them replace the $1000 part.     I went with the T-Series T22 (900Mhz rather than the 1. 2Ghz T23) and I've not been disappointed.   The extra speed is totally unnoticable and you get slowed by the disk drive more than anything else.   The Windows 2000 Operating system is excellent and NEVER crashes [finally-a reliable MS product]. 
extra speed ,Operating system is excellent ,
well built, smooth, fast, reliable.   In my opinion this is the best laptop out.   it's build like a tank, and it performs flawlesly.   Thank God I found this machine before they discountinued it. 
is the best laptop ,
I bought this computer in aug 2000.   For the time it was great.   I spent $300 more for a DVD player when I should have just bought a real one for my TV.   After about 2 months the cooling fan (which doesn't cool very well) started being really loud.   I sent it in and got it replaced, they did a great job and got it back to me in 3 days.   2 months later it happened again. 
does n't cool ,
I got this laptop about 2 weeks ago now and am so glad I did.   It replaced a toshiba and a dell.   The screen and build quality is much much better than either of the two machines I had previously.   I got the ultrabright screen which is amazingly great, vibrant crisp colors.   The notebook itself is amazingly thin, it feels like its half as thick as my old toshiba.   BTW it will play games just not very well if they are doom 3, but simpler games such as sim's etc are fine. 
vibrant crisp colors ,
I love using a laptop.   For the most part, I guess I like this one ok.   It is a nice size, not too heavy, and good view of screen.   I have had to have the screen replaced within my first three months of owning it.   Just one day the picture went out.   It was under warranty, but had to be shipped to Hewlett Packard to be fixed. 
is a nice size ,good view of screen ,
 I also installed a usb2. 0 card in the pcmcia.  Runs hot after upgrading cpu though.  i saw cpu temp climb from 84c to 93c on max load.  Taking the laptop about was as easy as taking a pc open.  battery life is so-so, but the thing was used so. 
laptop about was as easy ,
    My desktop is a 3 year old gaming machine, and I needed a computer to just do basic school work while I'm at school and during the commute home.   The battery gets 3 hours straight if I just do internet surfing, and that's with two batteries.   It also has ports for CAT5 networking cable and a dialup modem, as well as a mic and a headphone jack.   The speakers on this baby sounds a bit tiny, but then again, who uses the built in notebook speakers.     The laptop's hinges get pretty loose, but then again: it is used and probably the previous owner used it for business.   And I needed to buy a PCIMA card to have wireless internet access. 
have wireless internet access ,
 Come with a touchpad mouse and stylish mouse buttons.  It comes with a discrete microphone right below the touchpad.  The microphone is excellent quality as it picks up the slightest bit of sound.  This laptop has two speakers at either side for each ear to bring excellent audio.  It also has a USB slot, which would of made it one of the best in its time. 
touchpad mouse ,
Nimble lil travel notebook, no heavy lifting required.   great value for the money.   No peers offered 512K RAM for a comparable price.   Lightweight, responsive touch screen. 
great value for the money ,
I bought this as a replacement for my desktop and it has become so much  more.  I use it for watching TV (HDMI) I use it for listening to music, I  do my work on it (graphics, business tolls) and I play games.  The  battery does not last long but I bought it as a desk top replacement and  not for the road.  It small profile makes it virtualy invisible when not  in use (almost never). 
battery does not last long ,
  The latter forces the user to purchase a USB keyboard and mouse if you wish to use external devices.     My biggest overall complaint, however, has been that the machine tends to completely "lock up" from time to time.   This seems to be related to heat; in other words, when the machine gets hot, it is prone to locking up.   The lock ups are "hard" -- you must unplug the unit from A/C and remove the battery in order to get it running again. 
use external devices ,
This Compaq notebook is a great value for the price.   The K6-2 475 MHz processor has performed very well.   The system comes with :   AMD K6-2 475 MHz   4200 RPM 5. 0 gig hard drive   32 MB RAM expandable to160 MB   AC97 Link 56K modem   4 MB VRAM   Display:  12. 
great value for the price ,
 The Sony was actually my second sony laptop that I have owned.  The processor speed of 2. 8GHZ is nice and it is expandable to 1GB of ram which I upgraded the first day I got it.  I have noticed that having shared video ram  makes the video quality not very good for playing dvd movies.      It is just hard for the computer to keep up with the dvd decoding and viewing. 
makes the video quality ,
  Works great right out of the box.   I was very concerned about the glossy screen, but it's not as bad as I had anticipated.   My old laptop had a matte (non reflective/glossy) screen, but finding laptops with that option are considerably more expensive.   I bought it new at Newegg. com for $499. 
glossy screen ,
  The DVD-Rom is a nice feature but not totally necessary.   I upgraded the RAM to 196MB and the performance is much better, installation of the RAM was simple and straightforward.   , One of the great things about a Sony notebook is that it comes with a IEEE-1394 or Firewire port.   It's great for people who want to transfer video from of digital camcorder or camera to their notebook.   It apparently has transfer rates that are 40 times of USB.   It's not the lightest notebook, but I really like the fact that everything is built in. 
great things about a Sony notebook ,
I just recently bought the laptop and I am enjoying it.  I use it for music and playing some games.  I am enjoying so far and appreciate all of its features.      I would recommend for other who prefer to have a large hard drive and speed to purchase this notebook. 
have a large hard drive ,
I got mine second hand, but unused, due to some cosmetic damage to the case.   It has been working fine for 3 years now and I am considering adding more RAM to get more use out of it.   The only real problem was that the DVD/CDRW failed after 2 1/2 years.   And the fan tends to come on a lot -- it has overheated a few times.  But everything else is fine -- not ideal, but considering I got a good deal second hand definitely worth it. 
got a good deal ,
00 in late 2007.   I had to replace Memmory right away because it would not boot.  Runs warm but the Dual stage fan keeps it cool enough (has never overheated, even on my lap/bedspread).  It came with wireless LAN, 1Gb RAM, 40 Gig HD, 2. 0Mhz AMD Athlon Processor 2600+, Windows XP Pro. 
Dual stage fan ,wireless LAN ,
I have been using the ThinkPads for many years, and the T61 has proven to be a reliable successor to the prior models.   The display is excellent and keyboard feel seems just right.   It has survived a number of drops without any issues.  The only thing I dislike is the default wireless.   The wireless reception seems to be very unstable under non-optimal conditions - more so that would be expected. 
many years ,
I was given my Fujitsu Lifebook from my husband about a year ago.   I am so in love with this computer.   I have had about four laptops before this one, and there is no comparison.   I will most likely stick to owning laptops made by Fujitsu.   I have never had to call any kind of technical support. 
most likely stick ,
  I purchased a custom dv5140 via HP's website and recv'd it in a timely manner, that is just about the only positive thing I have to say.       Three days after purchase, the computer just stopped working.  Nothing, just blue screen.   When I turned the unit off and then back on it began to constantly cycle-- showing the Windows XP startup screen and then shutting itself down.  I attempted to contact HP for support but they were not very helpful.  The problem with scripted tech support was also obvious with the online tech support. 
scripted tech support ,
  This is my first Acer product and so far im ecstatic.   I've previously owned NOTHING but compaq (hey, they always have good deals. ) and they were ALL junk.   Compaq is on par with AOL for overall crappiness.   I really like the looks and quality here.   Its smooth running and has great features. 
have good deals ,
  One of my friends has this model, and I looked at it and played with it and decided that I wanted one just like it. My Inspiron 710m comes equipped with a Celeron M 390 processor (running at 1. 7 GHz) which is very fast.   It has a 12. 1" matte LCD, built-in wireless, DVD-ROM/CD-RW drive, and extended-life battery.   I upgraded the RAM to 2 GB, and replaced the original hard drive with a new 160 GB model. 
extended-life battery ,
 I planned on using the laptop for college.  I had read some reviews on the laptop previously that it had a weak battery.  I purchased the battery upgrade just to cover my bases.  It will say fully charged, but might only last 2 hours. 
had a weak battery ,
This laptop is fairly small only 5. 2 lbs, which is very convenient, and with the extra battery, it can last over 6 hours which is great.   I highly recommend getting an extended warranty because from experience dell products are not made from the finest of materials.   And with the warranty service, it can get fixed in no time. 
laptop is fairly small ,extra battery ,
 All these features provide the user with full functionality of nearly every program available in stores or on the web.  I like this product because it has all the functionality necessary for me to perform daily tasks and even advanced computer skills.  There were many programs pre-installed on the computer in which I made full use of.  The only thing I did not like about the laptop was the pre-installed Windows Vista OS.  It worked fine until 6 months after when an update for Windows Vista cause it to crash.  Overall, I would recommend this PC Notebook but with Window XP installed as the primary Operating System. 
made full ,
I bought this laptop it came with 512mb of ram and a 1. 1ghz/400mhz/2mb cpu and 2gb pc2100 ram another downfall is the ram only runs at 133mhz with the lcd of full brightness and the cpu running at . 700volts(I used centrino hardware control to lower voltage) you will get a little over four hours of battery life. 
full brightness ,
  I had to install XP Pro in order to use some business software.   In doing so soft touch button to operate the media player no longer worked.   It wasn't a big deal for me.   When I researched this, it seemed like many others had this issue. After about 1. 5 years of use, the plastic case just below the keys of the keyboard are worn. 
keys of the keyboard are worn ,
I bought this computer over a year ago to take with me to college and I have to say I love it.   For those of us that do not really play video games or use programs which require high memory/processing speed this computer is great. 2 ghz speed is plenty for most users.   It surfs the web and communicates with instant messenger with ease.   I installed Word 2000 on it and it works great.   The CD Writer works fine with the pre-installed software, and the DVD player is very easy to use. 
speed this computer is great ,works great ,DVD player is very easy ,CD Writer works fine ,
 HP offers a rapid on-line update service for their machines that is easy to use.  Trouble shooting for even the "less technical" among us is not bad.  Battery life isn't great, but hi capacity batteries are available.  Screen Resolution is great.  Love the reliability . 
Battery life is n't great ,Screen Resolution is great ,
 It drives me crazy.  The screen resolution is OK but not the best.  Is not as bright and sometimes is hard to see with the glare of the lighting around the house.  But beside that, I like the computer is pretty good and what I like the most is that is light on the weight and thin enough.  Nice computer overall.  I would recommend it. 
computer is pretty good ,is light on the weight ,Nice computer overall ,
5lb weight is very easy to carry around.     It is also a solid notebook.  It works perfect out of the box.  I upgraded it to 320MB RAM by replacing the 64MB ram with the 256MB board. 
solid notebook ,works perfect out of the box ,
  2ND PROBLEM IS ALLOWING WINDOWS TO MANAGE THE WIRELESS CONNECTION.   OTHERWISE GREAT LAPTOP BUT DON'T PLAN USING IN BATTERY MODE VERY LONG.   SONY DOES HAVE A LARGER CAPACITY BATTERY FOR IT BUT $299. 
OTHERWISE GREAT LAPTOP BUT DO ,
 So it will now spends the rest of it's days attached to the mains adapter.  So in summary, I would recommend this laptop, this is good quality reliable laptop and was a reasonable price.  Ok it's not as efficient as it was but for £300 you get a lot for your money and I think she's still got plenty of life left.  Note: If the battery life is must have feature then I would probably look into it a little bit more - or look elsewhere.  Also on Ciao under the same username. 
is good quality ,
  Returned that one & got the ze4805us with an AMD XP 2800 processor.   It blows the Celeron away and was less expensive.   The 4805 only came with 256 Meg of Ram - I doubled it and this machine really screams.   Whether you need it for surfing the web with the integrated 54g card, or to crunch numbers, this laptop is a GREAT value. 
is a GREAT value ,
 It has a few neat features and I must admit, it looks very, very cool.  Unfortunately while Toshiba was painting this laptop that sleek blue color, they forgot to load it up with a lot of raw power.  This is probably why this laptop is so light, compared to the alienware area-51 and the dell inspiron 8200.  This laptop does do its job well, with a good graphics card and speakers, but the value just isn't there like some other laptops these days.  This Toshiba satellite just couldn't keep up with the immense processing power of its competition who are slowly pulling away. 
sleek blue color ,laptop is so light ,good graphics card ,
 It has a great look and It gives you the millenium feeling of owning such a notebook.  However, please take note when opening the cover of the notebook.  One more thing is that the battery gets warm very easily.  I dunno if this happens to only this notebook because this is my first notebook I owned.  The warmth is rather unexceptional because my friends commented that theirs is not so bad as mine and I m afraid it may damage my system. 
battery gets warm ,
 I am a long term DELL customer and still like their stuff.  But unfortunately (or fortunately) there were lots of complaints about their D600 (mainly excessive heat under palm).     I like gateway products as well and this 200ARC (originally from samsung. ) is another proof. 
am a long term DELL customer ,
  These cannot be reliably hot swapped - the machine locks up if you try.   An external bay is available for the floppy disk only.   Battery life was good when new, but has dropped from 3 hours, to 30 minutes over 6 months.   The pointing device is a track point. 
floppy disk ,Battery life was good ,
A pleasure to use, even in the dark with the built-in blue LED keyboard light.  The wireless connectivity is fast, convenient, and fully 802. 11b WiFi compatible.  It works flawlessly in Borders and Starbucks locations that offer wireless broadband access.  Can be purchased new for under $1500, or refurbished for under $1000. 
wireless connectivity ,
My C1VN has been in use for at least five years and has served me well.  Despite its small size, it runs all the programs I need to run with great effectiveness. although slowly.      This was a UMPC before the UMPC craze. 
small size ,
The Sony C1 PictureBook PCG-C1VN features are 128MB Sync Dram,12. 0GB Hard Drive the weight is 2. light,about 1" Thin, memory stick magic gate  swivel camera and the power adapter. You can use a second external zip usb drive 2. With all the features that the product has it is a very good product to use. 
second external zip usb drive ,is a very good product ,
I must say, I am in love with this computer.    It is simply beautiful, and a real workhorse as well.      I purchased this system for school use, and even after being bogged down with the ever-so-large Adobe Suites, it still runs *perfectly*.        For the price, I couldn't ask for more. 
ever-so-large Adobe Suites ,
  I use it for web surfing, MS Office products, teaching, DVD playing, and movie watching and movie making from my digital camera.   Six-cell battery lasts right at two hours as advertised.  It also runs very quiet and only mildly warm.   The cooling fan turns on only occasionally when needed. 
digital camera ,
IT WORKED GREAT WHEN IT WORKED.   I USED IT LAST WITHIN THE 12 MONTH WARRANTY PERIOD AND IT WORKED FINE.  IT SAT UNUSED FOR ABOUT 2 MOS AND WHEN I TRIED TO TURN IT ON,IT WOULD NOT TURN ON.   I TRIED ALL THE TRICKS AND NOTHING.   IT HAD NOT BEEN USED IN THE INTERIM.   I GOT AN $835 ESTIMATE FOR REPAIR. 
WORKED GREAT ,
  Eraserhead mouse use was easy to learn and superior (in my opinion) to the track pad that other notebooks had.  The starting memory was on the low side (64 Meg), so upgrade immediately after you get the unit.   The case lid button sticks a little bit so keep an eye on it.  On performance testing, the Celeron 650 did not do as well as the other machines in the processor class. 
Eraserhead mouse use was easy ,
; just make sure you don't run too many applications at the same time, or the machine will feel very sluggish.  The Averatec is configured to run at battery-saving speed out-of-box, which also means slower performance.  If you have the money, I highly recommend you upgrade the RAM to at least 512MB, for a high-octane boost in performance.      The Averatec is great for the cafe because it has a nice styling and built-in wi-fi.  I do think it's a bit on the heavy side, esp. 
has a nice styling ,
 Cheap, fast, and beautiful.  In fact I'm typing this on the notebook right now.  It has a wide screen and the pictures are beautiful.  It can read and write CDs, and has 3 usb ports.  It also has many other features that come included. 
pictures are beautiful ,
  This guy is 6. 6 pounds and is it a bit expensive.   But it is fast and has a really nice graphics card.   Make sure to upgrade the harddrive to plus 4200 rpm.     I would say to make sure the warranty is understandable and long-term, as I would recommend with any laptop. 
sure to upgrade the harddrive ,
  For the money (I paid around $1800.   Here's what I wish it had:  Better cooling--it's rather hot operating.   A hardware volume control--would be easier to control the sound at startup if I could turn it down by hardware instead of a combination of keys.   A bit more scratch-resistant finish--the red (clear coat looking) lid is GORGEOUS, but it is VERY easy to scratch. 
clear coat ,
 I wanted a laptop mostly for word processing and games.  I loaded up my first game and I was blown away at the speed.  Had a pentium 450 desktop and it took 5 mins to load the game there, while with this little laptop 2 seconds.  Graphics were nice quality and its very easy to use.  It came with MS Works, which isn't the best so I did have to load MS Word on by myself because works isn't as compatible with word. 
little laptop ,
I have owned this laptop for about 6 months and found it to be of excellent value with a very good screen.   The initial setup was easy, it connected to our wireless system right away. 
very good screen ,
 However, a usb mouse is a must because I cannot use the touchpad at all.  It is not responsive, so I have to press extra hard to get any motion, and even then it moves very slowly.  The screen is also loose.  The hinges that allow it to open and close also let the whole top section wobble, and I am constantly worried that it could just fall off.  The screen, keys, and even top of the laptop show fingerprints very easily which look bad.  But, the design on the laptop looks sleek and professional. 
top of the laptop show fingerprints ,design on the laptop looks sleek ,
A slim design and large, crisp screen makes this my #1 choice for watching DVD's at home.  It's quick with applications and handles large images and video with easy.   A few quirks and lockups here and there but overall great performance. 
crisp screen ,handles large images ,overall great performance ,
11b wireless    & lots more. 11b wireless adapter is built into the lid - ready to use at a moments notice.  The only thing missing from this PC is a firewire port, but the PCMCIA slot is available for an adapter.      This is an incredibly complete and powerful notebook with battery life approaching 4 hours.  Stylish and priced right.      Have not had occasion to require support so am unable to comment on Compaq-HP support. 
powerful notebook with battery life ,
    Another things is the 3 USB port that's more than enough, you don't need to add any USB expandable port.  Is that so great to choose this type.     There is a little thing that bother me is the sound is so bad, you can hear only the treble sound and for the bass, it's not good.  The short time warranty for 1 year only. 
expandable port ,great to choose this type ,
 Its sleek fast and capable. Its battery life is very good, and more amazing I never heard such lame reviews on the net.  One says battery is great another lousy.  Who buys this for that anyway.  Its solid and its quick and its a bargain.  What the heck more can you want for $420 dollars. 
battery life is very good ,
This Sony has been a huge headache.     I'm EXTREMELY happy with my new Acer TravelMate 800XCi, which has double the RAM, a 30G hard drive, and a Centrino processor.  Until Sony can start making products with quality to match the overpricing, I'm going to bag on their products to as many people as possible.  DON'T BOTHER BUYING SONY NOTEBOOK COMPUTERS.  It's like paying for a Mercedes and getting a Yugo. 
new Acer TravelMate 800XCi ,
5 hours and the replacement batteries are only $99  --compare that to other laptops.   this is an ultra-portable so the keyboard is smaller but I don't find the keys difficult to work with at all.     I receive frequent comments on my laptop and always a question as to where can one purchase it .  if you can find one, --buy it --you really can't go wrong -- . 
is an ultra-portable so the keyboard ,
 But after a few days of use, I got used to a slightly new style of typing - as with any new keyboard.  Personally, I do not use the Toshiba NB205 for writing up long documents.  However, for browsing, emailing, and writing notes throughout the day, the Toshiba netbook NB205 is perfect.  Having said that, if you don't have the luxury of access to two computers, I would advise investing in the Toshiba NB205.   It is cheap and reliable, and that long life battery means it is truly mobile. 
Toshiba netbook NB205 is perfect ,long life battery ,
 Anyone who complains about the small keyboard must remember that it is the nature of ultranotebooks.  If you want a bigger keyboard, buy a bigger machine.      The battery life is great, up to 4.  The speed is flawless.  It is a full-size machine wrapped up into a 2.      The DVD player is great. 
battery life is great ,is a full-size machine ,DVD player is great ,
 The wide screen is clear and bright.  I like the 60 gig HD which is larger than most in the same price range.  Also the combo cdrw/dvd rom adds to the value added features of this notebook.  Just about the only issue I have with this notebook is the skimpy 256mb of memory that came with it.  I highly recommend installing more memory especially if your like me and use memory hogging programs such as Photoshop cs or are into gaming. 
recommend installing more memory ,
    Output:  The screen looks great and the backlighting is very consistent and can get extremely bright.   The autodimming feature is a nice touch, but it reacts too quickly.   Very annoying.   Also, the LCD appears to attract dust more quickly than I've seen on laptpos before. 
screen looks great ,is a nice touch ,
 A $1,000 notebook with a dvd/cd-rw, 256 megs ram, and a decent processor/videocard to do wordprocessing/surfing and some game playing.  But after using it for a few months, you begin to realize you got what you paid for.  The DVD/cd-rw doesn't always work right, it doesn't properly close cd sessions.  It locks up many times trying to burn a multisession cd-rw.  I get static when playing a CD or DVD. 
decent processor\/videocard ,many times ,
We bought a Satellite p105 exactly one year ago in May, running windows XP, and find it to have a number of annoying habits.     - First, this machine is HEAVY.   I commonly carry a Dell dimension that, while no lightweight, makes the Toshiba seem like a gorrilla.     - Connectivity has been a problem.   I don't know what the wireless card is, but it never receives a strong signal. 
wireless card ,
I got this laptop during an awesome back to school sale , and I can not say that I have had any crazy issues with it .  The built in wifi is excellent , and can pick up signals from far away .  The built in webcam is excellent as well.  I did notice that the microsoft office full package was not included and the person at the store asked me if I would like to add it onto my purchase.  The lag on the computer is kind of bothersome , especially when its in sleep mode. 
wifi is excellent ,full package ,
overall sleek and performs well.  very affordable with some high end features.  Good cpu to have for school.  There could be more room (space) for hard drive but there is nothing else to complain about. 
Good cpu ,
The acer aspire one is a great netbook to get started with.  With only a gig ram and a intel atom proccesor it isnt exactly powerfull but what can you expect from a what is now $300 netbook.  It is also very easy to set up easy to use and reliable.  it also has a good battery life lasting atleast 3 hours  per full charge depending on what tasks you are trying to carry out. 
is a great netbook ,has a good battery life ,full charge ,
 I've gone all day with itunes and the internet up without having to charge it.  I love the cursor and how sensitive the touch pad is.  The computers dirrection manual is easy to read and comes from a reputable brand.  I was a little scared going from a macbook to a Pc, but I am fairly satisfied. 
sensitive the touch pad ,
Overall we have been very pleased.   Things we like.  Nice big screen, full size keyboard and fast enough to meet our needs, plus lots of storage for pics and music.   Complaints would be short battery life, this is not a good portable laptop, needs to be plugged in.   The smart pad took lots of fiddling with and still has a mind of its own.   The keyboard takes some getting used to because of the number pad it seems shifted to the left, but no big deal. 
Nice big screen ,good portable laptop ,
I purchased this laptop for use at school in the summer of 2003.   So far, the computer is adequate for basic functions (internet use, word processing, etc) but can be slow when running multiple programs.   Larger programs such as RealPlayer and Adobe Photoshop bog down the processor and make the computer run slowly.   I also had problems about a month after purchasing the computer with the monitor not always starting up properly. 
running multiple programs ,
This netbook was my 6 yr old daughters chrismas gift and after 4 exchanges, she still is unable to go online with the wireless connection.  I sat on the phone with a csr from asus for 4 hrs and got nowhere and was told to exchange it.  Dont purchase. 
wireless connection ,
It is a good laptop for the price,     But the left palm rest heat, is not worth saving the money.     You will be stuck with a expensive paper weight in the long run, unless one tapes some insulation material or gloves while operating it. 
good laptop for the price ,
I love my sony vaio laptop, my husband got it for me as a christmas gift, and so far so good.  i love that it has bluetooth on it.  Mine don't have blueray though, i believe that there is ones that have blueray players.  It's a great laptop.  Oh and it has a great built in webcam.  Has cool screensavers and desktop wallpapers to choose from. 
's a great laptop ,Has cool screensavers ,
I got my new tecra feeling excited, I have always had good luck with toshiba laptops.   This one is a huge disappointment. 5 GHz with 4 gigs ram and only 4 months old.   I have had problems since day 1 but I was stupid and thought the issues could be resolved easily.  No such luck. 
had good luck with toshiba laptops ,
 It's early 2011, and this machine has certainly seen better days, but it still works great.  I've got the 2GHz Pentium M, and upgraded the RAM from 1 to 1. 5 GB, so it runs XP smoothly and is quite stable.  It handles image editing, MP3 conversion and other sorts of 'cardio exercise' well. 
works great ,seen better days ,
11 Ethernet are built in. 1 audio output and microphone input jacks. Includes 3x USB 2.   The reason for the errors is that Vista isn't very compatible with Microsoft Mobile 2005. 
audio output ,
A great value for the money.   I already have 1   and am thinking of buying 2 more with docking   stations so my entire office can be portable. 
great value for the money ,
  Decent processor speed.   WiFi works great.  I only see ONE little speaker located on the left side and not sure what kind of soundcard is installed but the quality is pretty good.   (max volume is a little bit too low but not a big issue)    Bad: [Problems I encountered]  1.  The two USB ports are too closed to each other. 
Decent processor speed ,WiFi works great ,quality is pretty good ,left side ,
The NC4000 with the advanced port replicator or the standard port replicator is the poorest quality setup Compaq / HP has ever produced.   HP decided to produce a "one size fits all" port replicators.     The notebook used as a stand alone unit is OK at best.   I purchased this to replace the Compaq EVO N200 with port replicator and am sadly disappointed.   I have returned all but the opened one that HP will not accept back. 
advanced port replicator ,
  The good thing is it's easy to reformat which you will be doing if you own one.   It's also very durable.   After everything it's put me through, I started not caring about its condition and tossed it around like dirty laundry.   To my surprise it help up quite nicely the past couple of years. 
past couple of years ,
The best laptop I have ever owned.  I really liked its silent operation and crisp clear screen.  However unlike the other reviewer, my machine had video problems after about 2 years of moderately heavy use.      At about 18 months the backlight inverter failed. 
best laptop ,crisp clear screen ,
  - Decent battery life.   I still get about a movie and a half out the battery.   - Graphics performance.   It plays games like GTA San Andreas with no real problems.     I honestly don't think there's anything I hate about this machine.     Best computer I've ever owned. 
Decent battery life ,Best computer ,
 It's my second laptop and first HP.  I did a lot of research and unfortunately, I could not find anything with a Core i3, 17" screen, 500GB hard drive and 4GB ram.       The quality is very good, the screen is beautiful, and I like the keyboard.  For the most part, it stays pretty cool except when remaining online for extended periods of time.  Recommendations: To purchase a laptop fan if this were to happen to you since this is almost to be expected from any laptop.  It comes with Lightscribe too, which I hadn't used before but I learned a lot about. 
quality is very good ,screen is beautiful ,
I purchased a similar laptop from HP about a year ago with an Nvidia Go7200 graphics chip.  A friends died just outside the 1 yr warranty, my laptop died a few months later.  HP refuses to fix them.  Unless you want to buy a new laptop every year I'd avoid anything with an Nvidia chip in it till the defective parts clear out of the supply chain.  HP also won't support you either, probably best to avoid them as well. 
buy a new laptop every year ,
Great fast computer with a great hard drive for your many needs, has a nice design and finish, great ideal working computer.  Great ideal computer for a gift, can't go wrong with this one. 
has a nice design ,
I recently purchased this laptop from tiger direct and I absolutely love this machine.  I paid $599. 97 for the notebook and I also purchased a 1gb memory card for $114.  It was still a great price even with the add'l memory purchase and I got a $100 rebate.   I would definitely recommend this notebook. 
great price ,
  As well as the web, it is also excellent for photo editing.     Even after two years of regular use, I still love it, and thankfully have not encountered any problems with it at all. 
is also excellent for photo editing ,
This is the best laptop I have ever laid eyes on.   It is fast, portable, and has incredible battery life.   The sound leaves something to be desired, but I have never heard good sound on a laptop.   This is well worth the $1200.   I paid $1750 for it a few months ago. 
is the best laptop ,heard good sound on a laptop ,
      MPC computers are more expensive than their competition from Dell and Gateway, but their customer service makes it worth every penny.   For me it is worth every penny.       Dell and Gateway get good customer ratings based on their corporate users.   Do a search on the web and you will see how poorly they treat individual users. 
Gateway get good ,
 It's been over 6 months, and I can only use it as a desktop computer now since the battery is not working.  The computer also freezes a lot and I have to reboot it lots of times every day, most of them when I watch streaming media or something like that.  Overall, it's been a good computer, but kind of failed me recently.   Also, as is the case with most Presarios -- I think -- the case is cracked now (I didn't drop it or anything), just poor design.  Cracked at the bottom of the screen (on the other side) and right in the middle of cover. 
's been a good computer ,
  NONE, in SIX YEARS.   I surf the web, play mp3s, and run Office 2003 just fine.   Unfortunately, it won't take a larger hard drive, or I'd be happy to keep it for ANOTHER six years.  now that Lenovo has bought the ThinkPad line I hope the build quality is still there. 
take a larger hard drive ,
  The Lightscribe burner is fast and the label writer/burner on the top of the discs is a nice feature offered with this model.   Not to say that the built in pad is not great, there is just something nice about having an external mouse when you need to do a lot of work.       Prices may drop with the new dual core AMDs that are soon to come, but for 1100 - 1200 bucks after rebated costs, this is a great buy.     Over all, I give this machine a 9 out of 10. 
having an external mouse ,pad is not great ,new dual core AMDs ,is a great buy ,
I bought this laptop from a guy in my hometown.  Even after a few years, the battery life was great enough to hold about 90 minutes of power.  The display was night and bright and was able to support 32bit colour. 
battery life was great enough ,
 The casing is very sleek with a bluish metallic look.  Comes with internal wireless b which now is obsolete but does still work and is compatible with most wireless routers.  The screen is super extended graphics accelerator for better viewing and great quality.  We deal with laptops on a daily basis and mostly sell on ebay under the username "CheapLaptopz".  When we say that this model is a definite recommend, we really mean it.  We get the 5105 model on a regular basis and it sells as fast as we get them in. 
most wireless routers ,great quality ,
Great small laptop had it for almost 6 yrs now and has been used almost everyday since.  DVD drive is great.  Runs all the latest Programs with XP.  It has some trouble with high-graphic games, but will run basic game including every SIM game i have played.  I got my moneys worth out of this. 
small laptop ,DVD drive is great ,run basic game ,
 I have experienced these  numerous problems, finally taking it to a technology expert.  He examined  it, finding it had nothing wrong with it, leaving us with a  problem-infected, useless netbook.  The horrible thing about this  computer, is that it is brand-new and already has cost us over 500  dollars in repair bills.  If you are going to buy a computer, stick with a  better quality HP laptop, or any of the other reputable computer  company, such as Dell or Apple.  This netbook was probably the worst  purchase my family has ever made, leaving us with a useless computer and  hundreds of dollars worth of bills. 
better quality HP laptop ,
 He examined it, finding it had nothing wrong with it, leaving us with a problem-infected, useless netbook.  The horrible thing about this computer, is that it is brand-new and already has cost us over 500 dollars in repair bills.  If you are going to buy a computer, stick with a better quality HP laptop, or any of the other reputable computer company, such as Dell or Apple.  This netbook was probably the worst purchase my family has ever made, leaving us with a useless computer and hundreds of dollars worth of bills.  In my humble opinion, I will tell anyone about the whole mess, and quickly not recommend it to anyone. 
better quality HP laptop ,
 I use avast antivirus and so far I have not had any virus scares.  The only problem I have had with this laptop is that when I run a large game, for me it was sims 3, the computer overheated and turned off suddenly.  A cooling pad would be a good idea for any computer, including this one.  Also, the battery life can drain pretty quickly depending on what your doing. 
good idea for any computer ,
 Well I did not want to spend a lot of cash, but I needed a laptop as I am a college student. I paid about four hundred and fifty dollars for this light weight laptop.  I have been thrilled with my purchase, and have not yet regretted buying this laptop over a Dell.  This laptop has a crystal eye webcam that is decent, the mouse is perfect for me, and I love the overall look and feel of this computer. 
light weight laptop ,
I purchased this product online about a year ago, and never used it outside of the house.  After 10 months, the LCD screen became very dim, almost completely black.  Compaq is refusing to fix the problem, claiming warranty has expired.  For the price of fixing it myself, Id better just buy a new laptop (not anything by Compaq or HP. ) The worst part is that they do not have tech support in the USA. 
buy a new laptop ,
 The power cord is plenty long at 10-12 ft, very convenient.       It mounts to the docking station on the bottom of the laptop and comes off with the push of a button.  Very convenient.  With the monitor stand and docking station it is a really nice setup for in the office and decent sized for on the road work. 
nice setup for in the office ,
  I was surprised how big the screen is.   I thought I'd miss my monitor terribly, instead I'm glad it's gone.   So far the performance has been good except I find that the video sometimes refreshes slowly.    The processor speed is good.  The CD whirs loudly (wind mostly) when playing a music CD, but otherwise works very well.   The attachable floppy drive is inconvenient, but makes the laptop itself very small. 
processor speed is good ,attachable floppy drive ,
    Overall I am pleased with its specs and its performance so far.  It is loaded with features.     On the downside, the battery life leaves much to be desired.  It lasts only about 1 1/2 to 2 hours, even with power saver features turned on (such as the screen brightness turned down.  Also, the keyboard frequently mistypes. 
such as the screen brightness ,
 Powered by Intel processor and graphics technologies, the G71 includes essential features to enhance your PC experience and life. Purchased an HP network PC for my kids to do schoolwork, play games, download music and generally surf the Internet.   After having a desktop for many years I was looking for mobility with large screen size.   I also like the speed of the Pentium processor.   There are multiple USB ports and that makes school projects easily completed. 
many years ,large screen size ,are multiple USB ports ,
 Computer boots up quickly and nice to have the built in 1. 3 mp camera.  Lenovo's reputation for quality is apparant in this product.  The keyboard keys are good size and was no problem typing in words, numbers, etc.  Only complaint is the battery only stayed charged for approx 1 hour with the standard battery. 
keyboard keys are good ,standard battery ,
 An even bigger disadvantage is the short battery life.  It takes about an hour to completely drain the battery.  I tried different things to prolong the life, like turn down the screen brightness and turn off the wireless internet, but it did not help much.  One other small thing is that it gets very hot, so it is impossible to keep it on your lap if you are working for more than twenty minutes.  So I pretty much use this laptop as a desktop replacement. 
wireless internet ,
    Another thing, Dell support is awesome.  They will never let you down.     Dell 6400 has average LCD, keyboard and touch pad.  None of these are impressive ( but more than average).  With midrange GPU, it can deliver good graphic output. 
deliver good graphic output ,
I must agree with the first review posted here and with many more that I have read in other sites.  I bought this computer for my son at Best Buy in August of 2003.  The initial impression was excellent.  Plenty of memory and hard drive space, RW/DVD combo drive, wireless network adapter, etc. 
wireless network adapter ,
 Believe me, the performance difference is enormous, and I think it's mostly due to the faster graphics chip.  The integral 2 USB ports and Ethernet are great.     I use this laptop with Linux (Fedora Core 1) and occasionally with Windows - basically I only use Windows for games.  It can't run the very latest and greatest, but it can [JUST] run Grand Theft Auto III.  Slightly older games - Blood 2, etc - and emulators, work fabulously.  Audio quality is very good, and the speakers face you while you use the computer (they are below the screen in the top half of the clamshell). 
Ethernet are great ,
Bought this notebook at Best Buy for approximately $950.  Appearance and sleek design were eye catching.  Purchased in July.   Since that date, it has been replaced 2 times. 
sleek design ,
I bought this laptop as a spur of the moment purchase.  I was more than in love with it when it was first purchased, but it went down hill from there.  I tried to love this laptop wholeheartedly, but it was very poorly constructed.  There were a few things I wasn't disappointed in including; the number pad, large wide screen monitor, and the web cam. 
large wide screen monitor ,
If you are in a hurry, need to make a presentation or get on the internet, this machine is SLOW and I mean slow.   The touch screen, mobility is great, but the so called battery life is not that long.   I would suggest if you do not like watching grass grow, then I would get another small laptop. 
mobility is great ,get another small laptop ,
Very neat little thing, great battery life, however the disk drive died three times already (clicking sounds, then message: 'disk failure'). We had ASUS Canada replace the hard disk the first time (two weeks ago).  The second time we took it in  they replaced the disk and the motherboard.  Now the disk died again.  This notebook is carried around in a heavily padded case, so it's not a matter of being careless with it. 
great battery life ,
      We had first purchased a compak and Christmas eve it was broke also purchased at best buy.        To make a long story short we did find a better (Toshiba) one after all.   I don't recommend the compak.      It is silver in color and the keyboard is black.  The screen is 15 inches and a very good picture. 
best buy ,make a long story ,very good picture ,
Slick black colour with Pentium M processor, available to satisfy all your need with its elegant small size.  The ability to add more RAM is a good option.  The laptop comes with a DVD rom drive which is Hot Ejectable/Safely removable for some upgraded fitting.  Battery Backup is good too.  The built in ATI MOBILITY RADEON will let u play each and every game released befor 2005 :). 
elegant small size ,Battery Backup is good ,
  Only had one problem with Power Supply burning out.   Other than that, I have had good performance and reliability from this laptop.     Hard drive (12 GB) did not take long to fill up.  Screen is bright and clear for a laptop made during this time. 
have had good performance ,Screen is bright ,
We purchased the 5620 as a 2nd family computer, We paid close to $1200 at Staples but with rebates I believe the final price was about $1000.      Having used laptops on the job for years, I am very impressed with this model.  Yes the cord falls out and the battery meter is somewhat generous with its remaining time estimates.  Overall, the pc is very fast the integrated wireless g works well and at the time I was shopping(5/04) - was the best value available. 
am very impressed with this model ,was the best value ,integrated wireless g ,
When I first bought the Toshiba 2065CDS I was told that I would hate staring at a laptop screen compared to my old desktop.   Boy were my friends wrong.   The colors were better and the fact that I could pack it away in just seconds made my life so much easier. 
colors were better ,
The Dell C640 is a nice laptop to have for student use.   I have owned mine for 6 months now.   It has great battery life, and you can get a CDRW, DVD-ROM, Floppy drive, extra battery, or many other peripherals for the 2nd adapter slot.   I have also added the internal dell 1300 mini pci  wireless card to the laptop.   This card performs wonderfully and reception is not a problem. 
is a nice laptop ,extra battery ,has great battery life ,wireless card ,
 All have limitations with the Sony design being the toughest to use.  Sony places two USB ports in close proximity of the  DVD.  As such actually using both USB's poses problems.  The new Thinkpad not only addresses this issue with some of the best ergonomic design but it also sports the lastest in USB protocol.  This protocol means that the new W510 will be able to support the next generation of fast communicating USB devices. 
best ergonomic design ,
This is one of Dell's best-selling laptops.   Its fast, reliable, and very affordable.   This laptop gives you the best bang for the buck of any laptop in its class. 
best-selling laptops ,
I was ecstatic when i got it.  What a little wonder.  Very good performance, ultra portability, great quality screen and handy wireless connectivity.  I am royally angry with it and now have to arrange for repairs in California whilst I live outside of the states.  WAIT TO BUY AND SEE IF MY PROBLEM IS A BIGGER PROBLEM FOR THIS NEW VAIO. 
great quality screen ,Very good performance ,handy wireless connectivity ,
I brought this laptop as i needed a lightweight compact laptop for university.  I've found it to be very reliable, and the wireless ability of it is extremely good too.  It still has everything the bigger laptops have and more too, like the wicked motion eye that acts as a great web cam.  In a nutshell it's a aesthetically pleasing machine that still works as well as all the websites say.  Not bad price for everything you get, i'm impressed. 
lightweight compact laptop for university ,great web cam ,
I wanted to buy from Lenovo because I thought the quality would be better than Dell, but so far this has been my worst purchase ever.  It took one month for my laptop to be shipped, and I had to have three extra phone conversations because of errors on their part with my order.  Then, when it finally arrived, the laptop could not find my wireless network. 
be better than Dell ,wireless network ,
I bought this computer in August of 2004 for college and have not had one problem with it.   It is fast enough to surf the net and do papers and research.   The battery life it excellent- about four hours.   This is a great first computer.   It has Intel centrino mobile technology- fast and light. 
is a great first computer ,mobile technology ,
Excellent machine, dependable, lightweight for the price and powerful enough to handle everyday applications.  My second Toshiba machine and it looks like this is my brand. 
lightweight for the price ,
 Despite what I read about PC-133 memory module incompatibility, the Kahlon module for about $35 works.  The DVD drive is A-OK (no hesitation when running) and the floppy is also an asset, in my opinion.  The "budget" feel is apparent with the weak speakers, but is remedied with external speakers.  Though it was a bear in getting the wireless card set up (much patience was required with Belkin support staff), it works well.  This is one quiet unit. 
external speakers ,weak speakers ,getting the wireless card ,
I purchased this laptop 3 months ago and completely satisfied with everything.  To get DVD burner, Centrino with over 5 hours battery life, 80 GB hard drive, 512 MB RAM, a lot of ports.  for less than 1000$ - is really good deal.  And everything is working pretty good. 
is really good deal ,
 Only problem is with Norton.  Been encountering problems with the update lately.  If the Norton update problem persists, Norton's going after the trial period.  Windows Vista is great but then again I'm not a tech guy but it works fine for me.  I use this laptop mainly for my music and some movies and internet.  Battery is just average: around 2 hours. 
Windows Vista is great ,
 This notebook is awesome.  It also has quick media direct buttons on the front of the chassis, so you can access music controls while the screen is closed.  You can access movies and music without having to start up windows and windows media player, so you can conserve battery life on the go.  The screen itself is awesome and with its 15. 
has quick media ,
HP mini laptops are good to use, easy to carry around and have lot of features packed in them, compared to the price and quality.    HP mini laptops are sturdy, have a lot of hard disk space, enough memory.  They also have a good battery backup, easy to carry around and can be kept safely in your baggage.    These laptops offer all the features like inbuilt camera, wireless capability, inbuilt bluetooth and card reader.    Buy a HP mini laptop today and make a difference in your life. 
HP mini laptops are sturdy ,have a good battery backup ,
 Once to download the test software, another time to check my external floppy drive, and a third time to take one of my tests.  When I attempted to turn on my computer to take my second final exam, it would not turn on.  It acted in the exact same way it acted the first time it broke.  I had to handwrite a test that was worth 95% of my grade, putting me at a significant disadvantage to the rest of my class. 
external floppy drive ,
  The laptop came with Vista Ultimate, which is an upgrade (I personally don&#146t like Vista, see other review).   Otherwise it has standard Toshiba software.  The media playback and gaming are awesome with great resolution and response time.   The laptop also has Intel turbo memory (1 extra GB of Ram) but I don&#146t see the difference. 
great resolution ,
I have had a very good experience with this laptop.   It offers great mobility for a "traveler", and has been very reliable.   It would be nice to have an integrated DVD/CD drive rather than the docking station but it is worth the mobility for size and form.   I recommend the SlimPro line. 
very good experience with this laptop ,
This is our 4th Sony laptop.  Clearly, the machine is fairly fast and has a large-enough display.  Heat generated is less than with our other smaller Sonys, about the same as the HPs.  Purchased through business division of Sony, there was much less junk on the machine than the other brands.  On-site service even here in the middle of nowhere is good (for another Sony machine).   Overall, I am positive about the machine, but it is not a bargain. 
has a large-enough display ,
 There is not too much junk software included, which is unusual.  The dual layer DVD burner is a Lightscribe drive.  It comes with a bag and good documentation.  It has an nVidia 8600GS dedicated video card that is DirectX 10 compatible.  The 160 Gig hard drive provides adequate storage.  There are plenty of USB ports, a VGA connector, Firewire, DVI and audio plugs. 
nVidia 8600GS dedicated video ,provides adequate storage ,audio plugs ,
    What can I say.  It's tiny, it's light, it's reliable, and I get as much as 4. 5 hours out of a single charge.  (I have two extended batteries for it; one gives me about 3 hours, the other a bit more than 4).  The keyboard is quite good - about an 8/10.  One VERY sensible feature - Caps Lock requires you to hold down the Fn key, so you can't hit it accidentally. 
keyboard is quite good ,
  Battery life is decent-- the power saving options help.     The CD-RW and DVD have been a pleasure to use.   There are a variety of ports (1 serial, 1 parallel, 2 USB, etc), card slots, internal modem, and an ethernet port.   The RAM will likely need upgrading to run any Windows OS beyond 95.     Overall, I would certainly purchase this model again.   I don't want to go back to bulky desktops after my very positive experience with Toshiba. 
Battery life is decent ,internal modem ,
  What good is a great price ($599-) when the laptop cannot be used without fear of a complete HD failure or some such similar calamity.   I regret my Compaq purchase very, very much.   Hope you may learn from my unfortunate experience.   I'm saving my pennies (tens of thousands of them. ) for a Mac. 
is a great price ,
I just got my new gateway 450XL Centrino 2 weeks ago.  So far I am very happy with it.  I also got a pleasant surprise when my unit came with a fingerprint recognition for security.   The notebook is light in weight and and very sleek in design.  I like the performance so far. 
notebook is light ,very sleek in design ,
Good processing power, long start time as with most similar machines.   I use it for running queries in the background and killing time watching video streams while they run. 
Good processing power ,
Full features fast processor speed and FSB.  4 USB ports.  SD card slot.  Upgrade RAM and HD post purchase possible.  Nice screen resolution.  2 years ago I paid $999 at Best Buy and that was a deal. 
fast processor speed ,Nice screen resolution ,
 The LCD display is sharp with a . 22 dot pitch. The processor is up to running even Windows 2000, however Windows 98 is more than sufficient.   The main drawback of ultralight, ultraportable laptops is the fact that the CD drive and floppy drives are external. 
LCD display is sharp ,floppy drives ,
Great computer.  I got it from an IBM employee so price wasn't an issue.  The computer survives abuse.  I dropped it once (about 1 ft drop) and it still functions normal.  Computer is very quite, doesn't overheat, it has the clear "IBM quality. 
Great computer ,
 Beautiful screen.  I use Photoshop and CorelDraw, this is one important reason for getting only a machine that can handle graphics much like my CRT monitor.  The key pad is great.  I find it much better to type on (touch type) than many others I. 
Beautiful screen ,
      Initially it ran very well but quickly slowed down to a crawl.  The build quality was terrible and even minor accidents resulted in large scratches.  Although the keyboard was large it was soft and felt cheap.  The design is okay and the corners are tapered off like on the Macbook Air. 
large scratches ,
 Still the laptop was running fine but last week its keyboard also stoped working, which sucks.  All the money which I paid for it gone in vain.  My experence about:PROCESSOR: Intel core i3 processor clocked at 2. 1 GHZ works really very fine for multitasking but it is not designed to handle more tasks. 
running fine ,GHZ works really very fine ,
  It is utterly incapable of 3D but that wasn't my purpose for this laptop.   The Display is amazingly comfortable for being only 14in widescreen format.   HP makes great keyboards.   The ability to turnoff the touchpad with a single button rocks.   The heat exhaust is out the back, which is very good.   The remote control is very handy for presentations. 
Display is amazingly comfortable ,
My Toshiba Satellite 1805-S254 has been through a rough year and has never failed me.   On the road or in the office it is a solid performer, plenty of power and delivers everything I need in a portable.   Weight is fine even for long hauls from one end of O'Hare to the other.   Touch pad took some getting use to but now I love it.   The built in ethernet connector gives a quick, flawless connection to my cable modem and office network. 
Weight is fine ,
I like this laptop, because i can do almost anything that i can do with my normal desktop.   it has a very nice sound editing quality, and doesn't slow down too much when i get large files.     About the only thing that annoys me about it is when your'e sitting in a chair, using it  it gets very warm.   i almost think its going to melt to my jeans. 
very nice sound editing quality ,get large files ,
 I use my laptop for everything from graphic and web design to AutoCAD and my MP3 music collection.  This is one of the best laptops I've ever used and that's saying a lot considering I've worked with a lot of them over the years.  It's price point is one that is affordable to more people than that of a lot of computers.  It also comes from a company that is known for making a great product, HP. 
best laptops ,
  I called customer service and they sent me a box to mail it back.   After six days of waiting to see pictures (they told me 24-48 hours), I was certain that this damage was not there when I sent them the computer.   The customer service representatives told me that they could not do anything to help.   I asked if I could talk to a supervisor I was instructed that it is impossible to talk to a supervisor as well.   I would HIGHLY recommend buying a different brand. 
recommend buying a different brand ,
 I don't own the optional 12 cell battery, but reviews online say that it can run up to 7 hours.  The display is very clear, but it has a slight glare to it.  The Altec Lansing speakers produce very nice quality sound.  My friends were amazed with the sound when they heard it play music.  I hate the fact that the usb ports are put so close together.  At least they are on the side, and not on the back like past HP notebook models. 
reviews online ,display is very clear ,past HP notebook models ,
This laptop is good for anybody who needs to move around, or for anybody who just wants more power for their money. 
laptop is good ,
 The mobile technology, Centrino, integrates Pentium M, chipset and wireless components to provide stable and optimized environment.  This support 11 mbp wireless which is "b" standard.  Most of hotspots only support this standard anyway at this time (2005-01-12).  That includes Starbucks' T-mobile hotspots.  Enjoy your coffee while surfing with this IBM ThinkPad T40. 
mobile technology ,
 It has great wireless connection with strong signal anywhere.  It has at great widescreen with a crispy bright nice view.  It can do most tasks without choking, but do not multitask very well; its Celeron processor is way to slow for that.  It&#146s great for watching, ripping and copying DVDs, but as said before, not good for multitasking while you are ripping you favourite movie&#133. it will stall eventually. 
favorite movie ,
 It's got 128 megs of RAM which is good enough for me and a generous 10GB which (if you don't download games or mp3s) will be more than enough.  I wish to add that the DVD viewing experience (in full screen) is quite crisp.      I don't usually carry this laptop around to school or anywhere else, but when I do, it is usually a drag.  Basically, it's a bit heavy.  Probably on the heavier side of most laptops on the market now. 
do n't download games ,full screen ,
Battery and hard disk only lasted little more than a year.  Just for lenovo to say it is not covered.  Battery failed.  Then hard disk. 
lasted little more than a year ,
 It is fast and very light weight.  It comes with a matching zippered sleeve for protection while traveling.  It is easy to use and has all the basic components needed.  It came with Windows XP, Skype, and Syncables software installed.   Syncables is a software that automatically syncs updated documents or files that you have designated to do so at certain times as you choose. 
very light weight ,
I love this computer and it works great and I've never ever had a problem with it.  It was only about $300. 00 and couldn't believe how great the price was let alone for how well this computer works for me. 
works great ,great the price ,
Compaq builds a solid laptop, now backed by HP support.   Shortcut  buttons are easy to program.   Built in wireless is easy to use and efficient.   32 mb of dedicated video memory make for crisp clean graphics. 
builds a solid laptop ,Shortcut buttons are easy ,crisp clean graphics ,dedicated video memory ,
 I have no problem carrying it around campus all day.  This keeps dirt and such off of the screen while I'm out and about (most of my friends have dells, and they all have small scratches from dirt).  Although retail on it is somewhat high, you can actually buy it direct from IBM on eBay for much less.  I've only dealt with customer service once, to order the free software that came with it, it was a very pleasant conversation.  I've had to re-install Windows a couple times on it, but that's because of my own stupidity. 
have small scratches from dirt ,
  I did not need anything too powerful or heavy, and relatively small screen.   That job didnt last too long, however, so now that I have a laptop at home, I barely ever use my desktop computer anymore.   I find the portability of the laptop far more useful than I thought it would be.   or just while watching television and doing something online while the commercials are on is also nice. 
relatively small screen ,
and the list goes on.     The laptop in general operates fine but I generates an intense amount of heat.   This is probably due to the processor.   On some occasions the laptop with shut down due to heat related issues. 
operates fine ,
  I tried several different types of software and everything opened quickly and ran just fine.  The DVD player worked perfectly.  I really thought I would try the laptop,and if I didn't like it I would return for a P4.  If it keeps operating as well as it is today I will be keeping it.  Also looks cool.  Lots of blue lights. 
looks cool ,
 Autonomy is impressive (5 hours being carefully).   I really prefer the point stick instead of a touchpad.    graphic card (ATI) has far better color reproduction than an integrated intel chip.   On the bad side : no optical drive, and really bad speaker.   The newer x40 is smaller but also slower. 
optical drive ,
  It's very easy to set-up & I love now having wireless internet capability.   I bought the Compaq because my desktop PC had become pretty much obsolete after many years of use.   So far the Compaq has exceeded my expectations.   I use my computer for basic word processing, spreadsheets, internet activity & am just getting started editing photos on it using Adobe Photoshop.       The price of the laptop (less than $600) was a huge plus for me. 
having wireless internet capability ,many years of use ,basic word processing ,
Superb product.  Excellent features and I find the Compaq/HP Customer support really responsive.  You simply cannot beat price/performance for this machine.  I bought a Compaq 2190US a few months ago and it has performed so well that it was a no brainer to buy the 2596US.  I was able to get it from Best Buy for $699 after all rebates. 
Excellent features ,
Computer was bought in September 2006 and is falling apart due to a flaw in its conception.  The display is large, which makes it heavy and consequently the hinges are very stiff.  The lid is not made to handle the kind of pressure required to open it and close it.  Eventually, the lid will break near the hinges and become loose, making it impossible to work with.  The manufacturer wants $400. 
display is large ,
I've used this VAIO for over two years now and it has been very faithful.   I appreciate its form factor - it is light and fits easily into a small briefcase.   The keyboard is fairly comfortable, although the right side shift key is too small for me.   I also found that the delete key is a little far away.   The touch pad is good and I can use it to scroll as well.   Windows 2000 has its limitations and since I started installing XP compatible software it has become unstable whereas it was rock solid before. 
right side shift key ,keyboard is fairly comfortable ,touch pad is good ,
Actually this is my first time to have Sony VAIO, and I can say that this is really great.  Before I decided to buy my VAIO I asked my friends who owned Sony things they told me that they are happy with thier VAIO notebooks.    It's compact design, lightweight and equipped with an impressive 15. 4&#148 widescreen display with Sony&#146s original XBRITE&#153 technology and performance which impressed me much. 
's compact design ,widescreen display with Sony ,
  Really, where else can you get a 2GHz processor, 100GB hard drive, DVD burner, and 1GB ram around 6lbs for about a thousand dollars.    I&#146ve had my acer for about two months now and I still can&#146t get over how great a deal it was.   The computer came partitioned which made it really nice and easy to install the software I wanted and remove the few programs I didn&#146t want.   I don&#146t remember but I don&#146t think it was loaded with any internet promotional software i. 
easy to install the software ,
  Construction is excellent and has endured several accidents and extreme temperatures.     Caveat: I have noticed sample variation with the LCD displays.   My coworker got one before me and he has a much brighter display.     I also love the compatibility of the D-series.   This is the 3rd generation I've deployed in my team (previously D600/D800's and D610's).   I have noticed that some of the early 1st generation D-series AC adapters are only 65W and you will get a warning if used with the D820. 
Construction is excellent ,
the acer is a great notebook and i love it.  i've owned mine for about a year and it's still going strong.   i highly recommend this product. 
is a great notebook ,
 For just web browsing and playing lite computer games this computer is extremely fast.  The key pad is not sensitive enough and i have to hit the keys hard alot.  Also if you have mulitple fingers close to the mouse pad, the mouse pad goes crazy due to its many settings.  the speaker system is excellent the loudest system i have heard on any computer system.  The software for the finger ID gets weird every now and then i have to input my fingers a couple of times to long in.  The setting are easy to change on the computer. 
speaker system is excellent ,
 I was scepticle at first because i had heard some bad things about Acer in the past never really been a fan of laptops.  But that changed very soon.  This laptop is the handiest thing i have for any job.  It processes all my documents perfectly and is very fluid and smooth on the internet.  I do some gaming too, and it can run some top notch games very smoothly without a hassle. 
smooth on the internet ,
  The screen is excellent and the weight is comfortable.   The only thing that could be improved upon is the built in speakers.   They tend to distort and never sound very full.   The touchpad is superb.   When testing touchpads out in Best Buy and Office Depot, I found that Toshiba's pads were smoother and easier to use.   All in all this is a great machine especially for the price. 
weight is comfortable ,screen is excellent ,is a great machine ,
 Battery life is amazing - around 6h WITH wifi, screen is really top notch especially with the automatic brightness controllà.  Overall it is just a very good laptop.  I'm not a toshiba fan, i've seen alot of problems with the tecra 9000-9100 series, the satellite 6100 really sucks but the M1 is extremely reliable.  On the downside, the laptop is not what I call thin and light. 
Battery life is amazing ,very good laptop ,
  The small size is fine for her needs. The light weight, even when you're carrying the charger is a Godsend.   It's fast too. The new laptop replaced a 2002 vintage Vaio. There are some problems with the new machine; most notably the built in camera doesn't work.   Why send it out the door with a non viable OS. 
small size ,light weight ,
  just happened again with no warranty so my computer is worthless.  i had heard good things of toshiba so thought i was getting a good deal but found out wrong.  they have the customer service reps from overseas that do not understand you and it is very nerve racking trying to deal with them.   I will never buy from them due to thier lack of fixing the problem permantly instead of patching it and their customer service.   there was a lawsuit against them due to these computers tearing up . 
had heard good things of toshiba ,getting a good deal ,
 It's sleak, thin, shiny and sexy, and weighs 4 lbs with an optical drive and the battery.   It runs great, but if you're looking to play the latest games you're out of luck.  Little to no graphics capabilities, but who the heck plays games on their ultraportable 2300 tiny laptop.     Love: The weight, size, screen, wireless connection   stability and sleak look.   Dislike: The battery sticks out the back, thats my ONLY issue with it. 
optical drive ,runs great ,play the latest games ,wireless connection stability ,
 Its battery life is quite long it lasted about 4.  CD-RW/DVD drive is swappable and works great, never failed so far.  Performance is fast, smooth.  Machine works with less noise and less heating up. S-video port is also a useful thing to have. 
battery life is quite long ,works great ,
    My personal unit has been sent back to Gateway three times.   The chassis is cracked, the motherboard has been replaced, the touchpad ceases to work, etc.   The first time that I sent the computer back, it was returned to me after two weeks with a note saying that "nothing was done. "  I immediately sent it back.     Please do yourself a favor and STAY AWAY FROM GATEWAY LAPTOPS. 
personal unit ,
  It came with a 500 MHz PIII and 130 MB of RAM.   The 12-inch screen is kind of a burden at first, but once I got used to it, I realized that it was the perfect size.   The only complaint I have is that whenever I try to play really good games, I don't have enough video RAM.   Otherwise, there are no other complaints.   It's really easy to carry, since it only weighs about 3 lbs. , and it fits easily into any backpack or even a large purse. 
was the perfect size ,play really good games ,
Overall I really like this computer.   I really wanted an apple but just couldn't justify spending twice as much cash.   This was a good buy and I expect to use it for a long time. 
was a good buy ,
 If you are trying to watch a longer film, pack a spare battery.      The XG dock must be purchased in order to gain a parallel and serial port.  The XG dock also gives you a composite video out port, and an extra USB port, but these are features that could have been included in the notebook.     Overall, the XG39 is a powerful, portable notebook that I am happy to have purchased. 
extra USB port ,
    As for being "tough", I initially thought they wouldn't hold up to well, but I was wrong.   After a year of rugged Army use, including some use in the dusty dirty Balkans, there are no hardware problems to date.   I don't know if that's really 100% true, but it easily explained my situation.   After reinstalling Win98SE and patching the OS with some drivers from the Panasonic website---it works like a charm.     Overall, it is a good computer. 
is a good computer ,
  There were no dead pixels and none after 2 months.   I did have to get the modem replaced, hence 3 weeks in the fix-it shop but besides that, I have had no problems.        The P3 processor is fast but to be honest, it is hard to tell the difference btwn the Celeron 1.   Also, the hard drive makes a clicking noise when it is thinking, quite annoying.   The Ethernet card works great with my high speed internet connection. 
Ethernet card works great ,
The Dell XPS M140 is the entry level model in Dell¡¯s line of XPS notebook PC¡¯s.  What the XPS branding does get you is improved support from Dell, full versions of internet security software, and excellent battery life.  The M140 is available with several options, though fewer than Dell¡¯s other laptops.  Other than the anemic Intel graphics processor, the base model M140 makes no compromises. 
excellent battery life ,anemic Intel graphics processor ,
 The Cs is a great overall laptop but I wouldn't recommend it for any sort of competitive gaming.  The video card won't pull off the graphics that you would be looking for, unless you upgrade the video card to handle that sort of work.  This laptop is a great intermediate laptop user computer because it has everything you need and not too much that you don't need.  I love the built in web cam that allows you to talk to your friends and hold video chats. 
is a great overall laptop ,hold video chats ,
  Average features.   Fairly heavy at around 6 lbs but it includes DVD ROM.     Like:  - Pretty good professional looking  - HP 3 year support included  - I like the keyboard feel.  It's quiet too.   - The speaker is decent for its size    Dislike:  - Have problem going in Sleep or Standby mode. 
speaker is decent ,
My boyfriend bought this just two weeks ago.  He likes it very much.  It has fashion good looking and great operation system. 
great operation system ,
 Though it's a little heavy, it's a sign that the notebook is built like a tank.  It has traveled not only to work and back, but all over the United States.     The specs are a little outdated now, though users who don't do a lot of work with graphics wouldn't have any problems.  I'm considering a replacement because it's able to handle only simple DV editing.  Movie Maker works fine, but Adobe Premier won't install because of the processor. 
Movie Maker works fine ,
 Here's what you should know.  The battery life is horrible.  Less than 2 hours on a full charge.  The outer casing - although initially looking nice (piano black) is really a pain in the butt because it smudged with finger prints etc.  The laptop is heavy. 
full charge ,
I have had one for about 18 months,  It is very light and little, has a very clear screen.  and has held up under constant use. 
has a very clear screen ,
  I took it back to have the manufacture fix it and they fixed it but said it was normal.   When I got it back I decided to take a better look at where it was broke.   Overall the performance is nice but the battery only run for 1 hour and 40 minutes with minimum programs running. 
performance is nice ,
 You can either by an external cd drive, or what I did was loaded the software onto my jump drive and then loaded it onto this notebook.  Another way was to put a cd in my other laptop and then I used my wireless network to copy the files to my notebook and then installed the software.  One other way is to download software from the internet, such as drivers, manuals, and updates.  This notebook only weighs about 2 pounds, its keyboard is slightly smaller, but easy to use.  The mouse pad takes a little getting used to because the buttons that are normally under the touchpad are on the sides.  It connected to my home wireless network on its own. 
external cd drive ,wireless network ,download software from the internet ,
I bought my Asus 900 in march of 09 and it never gave me any trouble. Was light and easy to handle and did what I needed for basic web surfing and checking email. It worked well until the battery charger died and I called Asus only to find out the charger has a 6 mo warranty and a new one will cost me $20. I dont know if this is normal for other netbooks but Im cautious of getting another one if I have to replace the battery every 6 mos. Had I known about this website maybe I would have considered Acer HP Dell or some other netbook. 
basic web surfing ,
We purchased 14 of these machines in January and they have been working great for our intended purpose (Internet searches and word processing).   We received them and they were ready to go right out of the box.   Since we received them in January, we have had to deal with keys coming off the keyboard.   When I called tech support they said the machine had to be sent in for repair.   Leaving us short a machine and wondering how much that will cost when the warranty is up. 
working great ,called tech support ,
  The screen is big, but that means loss of resolution.   The XGA screen on my other notebook is smaller, but sharper than this HP Pavilion's XGA screen.   The wireless G card on this notebook seems to be weak but I'm not sure.   The wireless B on my other notebook seems to perform better - it's range is wider. 
wireless G card on this notebook ,
  I love the LCD screen which is easy on the eyes.   What more can i say.   I have even let my 5 yro son use it with out worry.   You would have to use this powerful beast to get the full enjoyment out of it.   Fast charging battery, great mouse response, soft touch keys, light weight, fast, every option possible and then some. 
is easy on the eyes ,great mouse response ,light weight ,
 Another disadvantage is, that the display is bigger than bottom part.  Because it gets so hot that you cannot put it on your lap, I had to buy a special cooling plate just to use it.  Because it gets so hot, the fan is always on which makes it very noisy.  After about 9 months the original battery died. 
display is bigger ,buy a special cooling plate ,
  But I thought "Hey looks isn't everything right. "  So my teacher told everyone to turn their computers on, and I got a chance to see how fast everyone else's new computers took to boot up.   I was last.   After having this computer for over a year now, I have learned from personal experiences and from others that this computer is not the way to go.   I'm not trying to bash Compaq here because there are upgraded models that I like, like the Compaq Presario 1700-XL275. 
personal experiences ,
Excellent computer for the price.   A great computer for people just starting out and for those who are a little more advanced. 
Excellent computer for the price ,great computer for people ,
I don't own this laptop but I work for a big retail store that sells all major name brand laptops.   This laptop has brought back customers with thank yous and very satisfied.   Toshiba makes one of the best laptops in the market today.   Hands Down. 
customers with thank yous ,best laptops in the market today ,
This is the 4th laptop I've owned and my first Thinkpad (2 Toshiba Satellites and 1 Compaq Evo), and there is just no comparison.   It is fast and stable (I've had it for 2 months and it's never crashed or even paused).   The screen is large and bright and the keyboard's "feel" is superb.   It's missing a Windows key, but it's easy to program the keyboard to assign a key or key combination to act as the Windows key. 
screen is large ,
 got a local repair guy to look at it, who said the motherboard has collapsed and this is a very common problem with Sony laptops.  Major problems with motherboards, hard disks or LCDs.  Never would buy any Sony product again even if it is considered to be the number one.  Sony's after sales service is simply pathetic. 
got a local repair guy ,
Everything about the Lenovo (X-IBM) products are quality.   HP and Dell just don't compare.   I did a lot of research checking the Gardner reports to PC World and they all rated the Thinkpads high so I am sold.   GREAT LAPTOP. 
GREAT LAPTOP ,
so the size is not an issue for me.   However, I would much rather have a heavier laptop as long as the screen is bigger (which is what I love about this computer.   All said, I would recommend this Toshiba laptop for the gamer, home office, student, and anyone in between. 
have a heavier laptop ,screen is bigger ,
I have been longing for a PC replacement notebook computer and checked tens of computer sites to get the most proper one.  I needed at least 512 MB of memory, good sound and display quality, a long-lasting battery and a simple, easy-to-use keyboard.  A friend of mine suggested the Toshiba M10-S405 for its good value and excellent product specifications.  I paid $1600 for this notebook including the shipping.  I would strongly recommend this notebook if you like a fast-efficient processor with excellent sound and display quality. 
easy-to-use keyboard ,long-lasting battery ,good sound ,good value ,excellent sound ,
Overall mediocre performance compared to other in the cost range.     I have used it for last month or so and I am not very enthused about it .     Add on long life battery spoils the asthetics    Am looking to change as soon as i get anyother better one. 
long life battery ,
I have had my VAIO for 4 years.   It is hands down the best computer (laptop or desktop) I have ever owned.   No problems whatsoever.   I run it as a laptop at home, but in the office I hook up a wireless keyboard, a USB mouse, and 21 inch flatpanel screen (I do a lot of CAD work). 
best computer ,
 I am having a problem with the left touchpad key being loose (only 3 mos.  Sorry but this is unacceptable as most ofus rely heavily on our laptops.  I am a graduate student and can't go that long without my computer.  NOT ACCEPTABLE.  My husband manages the US service centers for a WELL KNOWN eletronics brand name and this would NEVER be acceptable to offer a customer. What good is a decent laptop if the company won't stand behind it in timely manner when needed. 
touchpad key being loose ,
The T41 laptop is great for business types.     However, I do NOT recommend this laptop for serious engineering types.     IBM makes the best laptop cases around, but you generally end up paying a premium and getting fewer features than you can get from other brands. 
laptop is great ,makes the best laptop cases ,
This is my third IBM laptop.  I've now had it for 4 months and have not been disappointed.     A great choice if you want a reliable, total desktop replacement without the desktop-replacement heft.     The T41 is supposed to provide a more reliable hard drive.  That technology seems to work well.     For me the biggest decision was whether to go with the T41 or a smaller IBM which didn't have an internal CD-ROM. 
smaller IBM ,
Had my DV 6928 since September 2008.  Works fine, and Vista is fine if it is left alone. I have only HP products and HP stands by their products well enough to have me be a return customer.   I am a tough customer. Got a great buy at Circuit City for back to school sale.   Otherwise I am definitely not a Circuit City Customer, besides they are gone now. 
Vista is fine ,
I had this laptop before someone stole it.  Its such a great computer.  Great to take anywhere.  Its is good for the price. 
great computer ,is good for the price ,
00 for it and love it.  It came with a free printer and wireless router mail in rebate.  The screen size is 15''. 4 which is just border line of being to big to carry.  The only draw back is the battery life.  It states that you get  1hr to 1hr 45minutes. 
wireless router mail in rebate ,
 A replacement battery is going to run you about $120.  Because of the battery I could not recommend this to a friend.  If you can get a good deal on the laptop and have enough money to buy a battery then go for it.  yea and another thing.  This computer will not be able top play modern games. 
good deal on the laptop ,
I bought this laptop a couple years ago as a first time laptop owner.  I'm TOTALLY happy with my decision.     Gateway has been EXTREMELY HELPFUL with their customer support.     I could say a hundred good things about this computer, but I don't have the time, nor do I want to waste yours.  What I will say though is that this computer has satisfied me and is still in use today. 
good things about this computer ,
An overall wonderful notebook that includes many essentials.  It is thoroughly enjoyed and provides many benefits.  This notebook may be the best in its price range.  This notebook is recommended to all that would like a good notebook in a good price range. 
good price range ,
The ultimate laptop PC of this writing.  Good keyboard, features, display, and design.     You won't be dissapointed. 
Good keyboard ,
 I have been stretching rubber bands and pressing them down to form a bit of friction.  Who would ever think that a laptop would be manufactured with cheap hinges which should outlast the live of the computer.  $70 if I send it back to a repair service, $60 or so if I try to disassemble and do it myself.  OVERALL MY 715 US HAS SERVED ME WELL, BUT I WON'T BE BUYING ANOTHER COMPAQ.  THE SERVICE AND QUALITY ARE LACKING. 
cheap hinges ,
 a pcmcia slot, which may be good in a year, when more expresscard things come out, but pcmcia is the best for now.  DO NOT GET THE 4-cell battery, it is terrible after 11 months, it lasts for around 50 min.  with the screen partially darkened.  Unless that is, it is a desktop-computer, and will be plugged in the majority of the time. 
be good in a year ,
 and Yes the CD was big enough to hold plenty more songs.   I have had to replace the battery twice.  And I also had to buy a new power cord as well.  The wire actually split where it comes out of the power box.  It doesn't crash on me. 
buy a new power cord ,
 However, because it uses an AMD processor there are some compatability issues.  The VIA chipset used has problems playing DivX and some other high-end video codecs.  "Blue Screens of Death" come up occassionaly due to the same problem with the chipset.  Even though VIA claims to have fixed the problem, some problems still happen.  Technical support is horrible: wait is too long, the tech support people do not know much.  I would recommend the computer to others but will inform them of these issues. 
other high-end video codecs ,
Overall I've been satisfied with this laptop after 3 years of use.   It is powerful enough to deal with my programming needs but over the last year the problems have started to occur.   The fan doesn't cool the notebook adequately and you will need to prop the laptop on a book if you intend to use it on your lap.   The fan has been failing for some time giving a sound resembling a dying duck.  The screen is crisp but won't go over 1024 wide so not very useful in that respect. 
screen is crisp ,
The low power LCD appearance is caused by a loose connection to the inverter.   I fixed mine by popping off the LCD cover (instructions found on HP's website I think) and adjusting the wires so they did not kink.   Has been working perfectly since.   This is not something that should be done by someone with little technical savvy though. 
low power LCD appearance ,
 I didn't really expect good sound out of a 4 lb.  With external speakers or headphones it sounds great.  At the time I purchased this I was also looking at the Sony Vaio Z1.  I am happy with my decision, I got this for a LOT less than the Sony and it's smaller. 
external speakers ,sounds great ,
  Seems to be very stable (I removed the WinMe and installed W2K professional without a hitch, after downloading the drivers from the KDS site).  The additional 256MB RAM was like $70 more, so I ordered mine with it.   Advice on the internal network card option: check for a sticker in the bottom that says "network ready".  If it has it, you can buy the card and put it yourself; if not, you have to send it to KDS for some retrofitting (mine came with the sticker).   I did not buy the network add in card; it is much cheaper to buy any generic PCMCIA network.  The advantage of using the Valiant network option is that it frees your PCMCIA adapter for some other things. 
internal network card option ,
 I've gotten 10 hours on the included battery doing word processing (if you take out the CD drive. ) It's got a big, brigt, crisp screen.  The speakers are a little wimpy, even by laptop standards, but that's quite minor.  The back side of the screen housing is also a little weak.  I feel like if I dropped somehting heavy on the screen, it would crack a little easier than I'd like.  However, overall, I find it to be the perfect blend of portability and power. 
crisp screen ,
For the money you could not ask for more.  This laptop is exceptionally easy to work with and understand.  It is also wireless and will seek out and connect instantly.  It is light weight and a breeze to use and enjoy.  I highly recommend you to give this model a try. 
laptop is exceptionally easy ,is light weight ,
"  Well, let me tell you.   First, the keyboard is one of the best I have worked with and I had an IBM which has great keyboards.   Also, the screen is just as bright if not brighter and crisper than any IBM T40 out there.   The fan is a little loud, but it is much softer than any Dell or Toshiba. 
has great keyboards ,
  I needed a laptop for being on the go as much as I am with my job and all and this one seems to go every mile I go.     I've only had it a couple of weeks now and must say it's well worth every penny I spent.     * The size is not too big and not too small.   * The keyboard layout is awesome (including the media buttons on the left side of the keyboard).   * The graphics are awesome (not really into gaming, but may start).   * The widescreen is awesome; great for watching those widescreen DVD movies. 
left side of the keyboard ,
If your looking for an all around excellent laptop-for normal every day uses to extreme stuff like video and photo editing and gaming.  This machine can handle it.  THe processors available are amazingly fast and the m15x has the best graphics in its class with a nice sharp quality 15. 
extreme stuff like video ,excellent laptop-for normal every day ,nice sharp quality ,
 It came with a trial version of Microsoft Office and Norton Anti-virus.  I also had a hard time because when my Norton Antivirus trial ran out I didn't he money to right away pay the almost $70 for the full version.  I used the wireless connectivity that came with the computer and I have never had any problems connecting when I am in the area of wireless networks.  One problem though is that it doesn't connect to Internet connections very far out.  The first problem I had with the laptop came about 6 months after I bought it. 
wireless networks ,used the wireless connectivity ,
I was originally looking for an Apple notebook, I went ahead with this one as a more affordable alternative (according the the Best Buy sales guy). This is just as beautiful, with a gorgeous high quality screen very similar to Apple. I have contacted them many times via email, chat and phone, they gave me system downloads, upragrades and it hasn't improved my Sony Vaio one bit. There are many more minor problems, but I wish I would've spent the extra money and got a higher quality laptop whether it's Apple or not. 
Best Buy sales guy ,gorgeous high quality screen ,many times via email ,
  I downloaded a utility called RightMark CPU Clock Utility.   It has a feature called 'Performance on Demand'.   It is exactly that.   I can watch the processor speed increase to full power when an app is called for, then it drops back to the idle CPU speed of 800 Mhz.   Sounds like a better option than the utility the other gentleman was using. 
full power ,
  Recently the dvd/cd drive started failing.  It would play cds/dvds one day and not the next.  It would burn data/media files in the morning and not in the afternoon.  I spoke to a representative at best buy who said that it might be that the laser is wearing out (which can be replaced).   Other than that one problem 2 1/2 years later, it works well.  I bring it everywhere with me. 
best buy ,
The reason I bought the protege r500 was because It's the lightest weight and thinnest laptop with a nice sharp screen.    Build quality is excellent.  Traveling a lot meant I needed it to be dependable as well, so the three year warranty is great.   The main problem was with finding it in stock anywhere, after placing orders a lot and canceling due to back orders.  I finally had my order filled at by firstworldtech. com , they had it in stock and I my protege the same week as ordered. 
nice sharp screen ,year warranty is great ,
    When I finally get them on the phone, they ask too many questions instead of just giving me a location.   Then they  tell me there is no service facility near Chicago, and I have to mail it to San Diego.   Never mind. I'll buy another. 
ask too many questions ,
 I run alot of demanding prcesses and there is no lag.  The speakers work well and sound good for a laptop.  I also have to mention that the software is the most stable I have ever seen in a Windows baced system.  The XGA HD TrueBright screen option is well worth it.  The conectability Is more than most will ever need 4USB ports 6 In one card reader RJ11 RJ45 Wireless 802. 11g Optical drive (in my case DVD R CD RW)ECT. 
sound good for a laptop ,TrueBright screen option is well worth ,
I have been researching laptops for months and finally found a reasonable, high powered machine.  It is a good lookin little computer with every option you could want.  I looked at every machine out there and this feels solid not flimsy.  Fits perfectly in the Samsonite L25 case for lite weight travel.  I would recommend this laptop to anyone. 
feels solid ,
The RAM is enough for watching online videos and using basic programs, but don't count on having any success with a plethora of windows open.  This product doesn't quite do well with multitasking and crashes when put on too much stress.  I also found that running big programs and minimizing them to do something else causes delay in the computer response.  Something like a minimized video game will give you quite of the thorn in your side if you don't close it. 
watching online videos ,
I've had the computer for about a year and no problems, which is more than I can say for my previous Dell and Compaq laptops.   15 inch screen is clear, buttons and controls are easy to see and use with attractive backlighting.  Running Windows XP Pro, 512 MB RAM, 30 GB HD.   The cooling fan is loud and annoying, however, cycling on and off every 5 minutes or so depending on processor demand.   I've also noticed that the screen has key impressions on it from contact with the keyboard when closed.   I wonder if the keyboard pressure on the face of the screen will cut into its life. 
inch screen is clear ,controls are easy ,
working at a computer center of a major city, laptops are a daily occupation.  We see hundreeds of them, buy hundreeds of them.    But so far, the NX7000 is the best I've ever seen.      Fast, silent, bright screen, perfect for DVDs, light, nice keyboard, excellent WiFi, nice speakers, rugged.   Also there is one thing that will probably become a standard, the "slide part" next to the mousepad.  It works like the scroll wheel on most mice, but feels much more natural. 
excellent WiFi ,nice speakers ,nice keyboard ,perfect for DVDs ,bright screen ,
This Gateway is all I need for work and personal web browsing.   I got it real cheap for $499. I've had experiences with Toshiba, Dell, and HP all have given me problems in the past.   So far so good with this particular Gateway but only time will really tell if it holds up. Very fast speed and good memory for the price. 
Very fast speed ,
  Even worse, when you attach the optional port replicator, you find that the replicator "replicates" only one of the USB ports, so you lose one.   This is just sloppiness on IBM's part, and I'm hopeful that a new port replicator is on the drawing board.   (I wouldn't want higher resolution unless I also had a larger screen. )    But for speed, battery life, service, a good support website, and because it's black and cool :) , I continue to vote for ThinkPads. 
attach the optional port replicator ,good support website ,
  I would recommend this machine to anyone who travels, as it is small enough to fit into a purse or messenger bag along with books.   It weighs a mere 2 lbs.   There is an external monitor port if you would like to connect a large monitor while at home.   I was concerned due to the compact size, the keyboard would be too small for adult hands, but that fear passed immediately.   It's quite comfortable.   Lastly, one thing my daughter was really impressed with was the clarity of the 9 inch screen. 
large monitor while at home ,compact size ,
 In terms of price and specification, this machine looks good on paper. 
machine looks good ,
