I agree with the other reviewer.  The model looked nice and was inexpensive, but the coffee is never hot.  We always have to nuke it in the microwave, especially after adding milk or cream.     I would spend more on a better model. 
coffee is never hot ,
This machine is a bit like a Rolls Royce - controls for everything and looks great.  But small hidden problems.  Once you are aware of this problem it is easily corrected when you turn the machine on and it works perfectly. 
are aware of this problem ,
 I could have done a better design job.  By the way, who did design this piece of ****. 
have done a better design job ,
Don't ever buy this coffee maker.   This is the worst design for a coffee maker that I have ever seen.   The company obviously did not test this product before selling it.   I had to return this item to the manufacturer after only six months of use.   Although they replaced the first coffee maker, the second one has the same faulty design problems.   The ground basket frequently overflows causing a huge mess and the flow will often 'short-out' the electronics that make the coffee maker work. 
has the same faulty design problems ,
of course both times I had stepped away during brew, and had coffee and grounds in cabinet drawers from counter top to floor.     Ergo, I'm a captive audience until I am certain that no overflow will occur.  But the coffee is hot, stays hot, and one pot holds all we need.     I wonder if they will get the patent on that lid.  It isn't a great design. 
coffee is hot ,
Lucky for me, I didn't read all these negative reviews before I purchased my Delonghi Figaro.   After doing extensive research comparing features and reviews for dozens of coffee makers around my price range, I decided this was the one for me.   I have had zero problems with my Delonghi after owning it for almost two years.   Clean up is easy, and I throw all the pieces in the dishwasher once a week to get a thorough clean with no problems. 
get a thorough clean with no problems ,
  The only way to have the coffee stay hot for any length of time it to preheat the carafe with hot water.   That defeats the purpose of the timer and having fresh coffee first thing in the morning.       The cover to the carafe must be twisted to remove it.   There is little to grasp with which to do this.   You almost need to use pliers to be able to grasp it. 
coffee stay hot ,
 Basically, I only need three less spoonsful of coffee grinds than the amount of cups of brewed coffee I want.  So, for instance, if I want to make a full 12-cup pot of coffee, I only need to use 9 well-rounded teaspoons of coffee grinds. The cord is a bit too short and it is slightly cumbersome to add water to the reservoir without spilling water.  But if you pour slowly from the side, you won't have much spillage. 
make a full 12-cup pot of coffee ,cumbersome to add water ,
 Coffee always had decent coffe makers regardless of price.   Obviously that isn't the case any longer.   We had to add an extra 2-3 tablespoons of coffee per 12 cups to make it even bearable and it still wasn't great.   We tried everything.  After finally realizing that the cost of the extra coffee and paper towels alone would pay for a nicer coffee maker, we finally got rid of it.   Lesson learned. 
had decent coffe makers ,
    - It works wonderfully as a tea kettle.     - Its footprint is very small and the base is very slim.      - Stay-cool handle and lid.     - It comes with an extra lid in case you wish to use the appliance as a hot pot. 
footprint is very small ,
  Lastly, a minor beef.   The stainless steel body looks nice, but it's a pain in the rear to keep clean.       One good thing I found is that this unit has a special button on it for when you are brewing 1-4 cups of coffee.   It changes the brewing characteristics and makes the small amount of coffee come out tasting good and not burnt and/or watery.  In summary, this is what I would consider to be a "low-use" unit. 
makes the small amount of coffee ,
I am the only coffee drinker in the house, so I bought this machine to make enough coffee for myself.   It seemed ok at first, and I loved it, but it was cheaply made.   It leaks constantly, and I am tired of cleaning up water after every cup.   I have only been using it for a month or two, and it did this from the beginning, so this is a bad buy, esp.  for the price. 
is a bad buy ,
I bought this machine.  two months ago.  I am still waiting for a cup of coffee.  The factory does not support the machine, nor do they train the independent service contractors to service it.  Customer service is very kind and gentle on the phone, however I suspect they are aware they have a bad product, hence the niceness.  They have not made any of their commitments to fix the machine, I am giving up, and sending it back. 
have a bad product ,
  The cover for the water reservoir actually shrunk after a few uses so I wonder where the plastic went.   I cleaned it for two whole days (vinegar, water, vinegar, water etc) to get the plastic taste out to no avail.   Overall this was very disappointing because of the time I invested in it to get it "clean" the time to buy it/then return it and my burned hand.   Too top it all off the coffee tastes burnt EVERY-TIME.   With different brands of coffee (and cold water, removing as soon as it's done brewing I'm really trying to make this work. ) so it is going back to the store tomorrow and I will find a different maker. 
was very disappointing because of the time ,coffee tastes burnt ,
Love the taste of the coffee, love the design for the most part.  Was very upset to learn that the maker does not have a warming plate because it's thermal.  Therefore, what you get is what you get as far as temps.  Do not expect your coffee to get hotter as it sits on the warming plater as there is none. 
upset to learn that the maker ,
  The screw cap on the top is impossible to get on.   The filter is on a hinge that breaks daily and the water reservoir never empties.   We usually get 6 cups per pot.   As a big coffee drinker that equates to one cup each for two people. you have got to be kidding me.   Your designers goofed. 
screw cap on the top is impossible ,
This coffee maker is the most stupid design I've ever used.  And believe me I'm a big time coffee drinker.  It's not the electric machine that is screwed up, it's carafe.   Who in the universe came up with something that gets stained and coated with coffee from the very first pot and then is impossible to clean.   What idiots designed this.      Ok, so then I go on line to see if there is a safe way to clean it. 
is the most stupid design ,
Have a hot cup of coffee brewed the way you like it in 3 minutes.   Works super with both pods and regular coffee. A folded paper towel will keep your cup from vibrating out from under the basket. 
Have a hot cup of coffee ,
 I only had one of those cafetiere(. ) things which is more like a coffee pot but makes a decent cup.  My mum bought me this one, and I have to say it makes really awful tasting coffee.  I always used - I don't use it any more - the double sized pods for one mug or two small cups, but even then it's weak, watery and just plain nasty.  The water even tastes different in this thing.  And after only a few uses, the water container which fits on the back, started leaking from the bottom whenever I re-filled it. 
makes a decent cup ,tastes different in this thing ,
This is the ultimate cheaper coffee maker.  It has an extra heater that raises the temp of the water just before it hits the grounds, extracting a fuller flavor from the beans.   the draw back is the tall carafe, not top shelve dishwasher friendly.   Ours broke after 2 years and I instantly ordered another. 
is the tall carafe ,
Cuisinart has always been my preferred brand for a coffee maker.  I love the way it tastes, I love that you do not get a burnt smell or taste.  Honestly, I am hooked on Cuisinart for coffee. WHY DID I BUY IT. 
get a burnt smell ,
 Also, if you buy a grinder, you can buy smaller amounts of specialty coffees (Irish cream, mocha, etc. )by the pound in most groceries and try something new.  That also lets you save money because you don't end up with a pound of a flavor you don't like.      Frothing the milk was slightly awkward for me because I didn't really know how it worked and chose a mug that was too deep. 
buy smaller amounts of specialty coffees ,
I bought a Breville BKC600XL over the weekend.  I plugged it in and primed it as instructed.  Well it won't seem to brew a single cup of coffee.  I can hear the pump priming and everything, yet no water flowing through the K-Cup chamber.  At most there is only a little moisture and heat in the armature. 
brew a single cup of coffee ,
 (1) It is difficult to fill the water container without dripping--it is too narrow.     (2)  Unless you are extremely careful, you will have a counter full of coffee that over flows the brewing area.   The glass carafe must be placed exactly right or it won't release the little lever that lets the brewed coffee through.   I always  lean over and try to see if the little lever is in place so the coffee flows through to the carafe. 
release the little lever ,
I was so disappointed in this coffee maker.   It just never made the coffee hot enough.   Everything else about it was great - it was easy to program, easy to fill, and I liked the looks.   But even when it was brand new it just never made the coffee hot enough.   Replaced it today with a Krups, and was so happy to have HOT coffee again.   Even after 4 hours, the coffee in the Krups carafe was hotter than my first cup of the day in the Mr. 
was so disappointed in this coffee maker ,
  The tray also has a lid that you can remove or add to  accommodate larger coffee mugs.   I have found the heating process to be  quick, and have been able to enjoy my coffee or hot cocoa in about 3  minutes or less.   The Keurig also has an auto-off feature that will shut  off the appliance when not in use for about 2 minutes.   This version of  the Keurig is great for small spaces. 
accommodate larger coffee mugs ,
they should put a couple of more dollars on thr price and make a safer and dependable product.   The filter tray does not stay in, falls out when trying to get a cup of coffee.  That can make someone get hurt if their not fully awake.    Tis is the worst coffee maker i haver used or bought.   One more thing about this junk, when y ou pour a cup and you don't open t he lid, it pours all over.   Don't reccomend this product to any any one . 
is the worst coffee maker ,
We purchased this coffee maker because our old Mr.  Coffee under the cabinet one died.  We were spoiled with the hot coffee our Mr.  Coffee Maker made.   This machine is well designed and very easy to use, however the coffee seemed warm and did not stay warm by the time you finnished your cup. 
stay warm by the time ,coffee seemed warm ,
  All of a sudden it doesn't work.   Also, the warming plate does a very poor job, the coffee is never really hot.       My guess is that another piece of throw away technology has bit the dust.   You also got to understand that the manufacturers of coffee makers don't get good design engineers to work for them. 
coffee is never really hot ,
 I'm going to return it, not because I'm that unhappy with it, but only because I'm spoiled by the pour-through style carafe lid of another brand.  I thought it was broken until I bent way down and stared at it and saw a very small red marker.     The lid of the carafe is difficult to turn.  I am used to a pour-through design, which doesn't need to be opened after brewing, so I'm not sure if this carafe's lid is more difficult than usual. 
lid of the carafe is difficult ,
 I have two units (the oldest is about 6 years old), and have not had this issue.  I noticed that as the unit got older, the grind-basket needs extra "incentive" to sit into its sleeve.  If the basket doesn't go all the way into the sleeve, and you try to force the cover down, the cover would probably break.   Hope this helps.   BTW, I just contacted Melitta and this unit (and the larger one with the weather station) have been discontinued.  They said they are negotating with a new manufacturer, and should have a new type unit sometime in 2010. 
have a new type unit ,
When our old and reliable basic Mr Coffee died we automatically went in search for anther one.   We found this one on sale and it seemed like a nice upgrade to the old model.  The pause feature just doesn't work well.   We stopped using this because the coffee still drips out onto the warming plate.  Even after the brewing cycle is completed its not uncommon for it to drip onto the plate.   Now pouring the coffee itself is the worst part. 
is the worst part ,
Have had this coffee maker for about six months now.  It's the best coffee maker I have used so far.  The thermos container keeps the coffee piping hot for hours with no bitter taste as a result of evaporation.  It has a streamlined look that is very attractive and fits in with any decor. 
coffee piping hot ,
  Initially this problem happened only occasionally; now it happens virtually everyday.   If I don't stand there and hold the basket door in while the grinding/brewing occurs, the door would pop open repeatedly.   I can't believe that Cuisinart hasn't resolved this fundamental problem.  And yes, the machine is not easy to clean, but I would be willing to overlook that if not for the huge mess made when the basket pops open. 
basket pops open ,
I love Delonghi but this coffee maker is terrible.  The coffee is weak, the light never turns off on mine so I have to unplug it everytime.  The coffee gets so hot it takes 3 ice cubes to make it drinkable within an hour.  The top is already leaking.  I got mine t a discount place so losing $30 isn't too bad.  if I paid retail then I'd feel pretty dumb. 
coffee maker is terrible ,coffee gets so hot ,
We bought this coffee maker about 6 months ago and I wish we would have returned it.  It drips coffee every time you pour so we have to put a paper towel next to the cup.  The basket catch is very difficult to open and the basket itself will not re-seat easily.  The latest thing is that it shuts itself off while brewing.  We have no idea why this is happening. 
basket catch is very difficult ,
 I'm not sure there are many of these machines still out there, since they have been updated since this model came out.  However, I bought mine refurbished for around $1200 a few years ago, and have not had any trouble with it.  This makes very good expresso.  Buy whatever brand beans you like and put them into the bean dispenser on top. 
are many of these machines ,
  When the coffee makes it into the pot, it's nice and hot.   It stays hot of hours.      Half the time the coffee ends up on my granite tops, inside my drawers and on the floor.   What a mess to wake up too. 
stays hot of hours ,
  I've been using it for about two months and I love it.   I'm boiling water in the teapot and grinding beans and getting work with hot coffee.  Coffee stays hot from 7:30 until after 11.   It is 11:09 a. 
Coffee stays hot ,
  (there is a audible alert -but how many of us are actually in the kitchen when it goes off. )  This is most important as the carafe is thermal which means you cannot see the coffee in the pot either.   Most annoying and definately a design oversight. -Slow & awkward to pour the coffee as you have to hold it almost completely upside down to get the coffee to pour. -Cleaning the carafe is a challenge as the hole is very small.   Coffee tastes worst and worst unless I bite the bullet and struggle to clean it. 
is a audible alert ,Coffee tastes worst ,
 The coffee flavor is great especially on the Strongest setting.     Coffee stays hot for hours and you can actually control 'how hot'.   It's extremely easy to use and program.     The only down side is the FUSE.  We've replaced ours (4) times in 7yrs. 
Coffee stays hot ,
When my husband and I needed a new coffee maker, we decided to go for a small machine with a little footprint.   We are not coffee aficionados and will pretty much drink anything caffeinated.   Our only requirements when buying this machine were that the coffee stay hot and have an auto-off feature. <p>This Black and Decker 5 Cup with Stainless Carafe fit the bill.   We paid about 24. 00 at Target and it does exactly what we need it to do. 
coffee stay hot ,
  I never even thought that maybe it is the quality of the glass carafe.   I will not be buying a replacement carafe, as I did this once before in Oct 06.   I can no longer risk the safety of having hot coffee possibly burning a child that is nearby in the kitchen.   Just wanted to warn other potential buyers to look for a different type of coffee carafe. 
safety of having hot ,
Bought this coffee maker at Target.   Despite being made of stainless steel, the carafe is not thermal, so the coffee does not stay hot.   When pouring, the coffee runs down the side of the carafe, making a mess.     Not recommended. 
carafe is not thermal ,
     This machine doesn't have a 1-4 cup setting (which translates to about 2 cups in the real world).   The result was that I almost couldn't add enough coffee to the basket to get a strong cup.  The water flows quickly and mostly thru the center of the filter, thus ignoring a lot of the ground I'd added.     Disappointed. had to return it. still searching. 
get a strong cup ,
My husband and I had a Black and Decker coffee maker that we received for a wedding present in 1991.   It finally died after 13 years of faithful use.   We then went and bought a Mr.  Coffee, didn't like it, returned it to Sears.   Then purchased a Black and Decker Smart Brew.   It makes good coffee and is easy to use, but the coffee isn't very hot and the lever on the filter basket does not stay on very well. 
coffee is n't very hot ,
 I don't know if 4-Cup means four measuring cups for four glasses, but I can drink the entire decanter's worth in two mugs.     I, too have a defective clock.  It gained approximately one hour over the period between a Wednesday night and Monday night when I got around to resetting it.  It's a great little coffee maker, except for the issues keeping correct time. 
have a defective clock ,
this is a piece of garbage, unless you like bland, watery coffee, dont get this thing.  It is very easy to use and setup, but it produces very bad coffee. 
produces very bad coffee ,
  Brewed coffee finds its way into a sturdy stainless thermal vacuum carafe.   The MT500&#146s carafe keeps coffee sipping hot for almost three hours.   The controls for the MT500 are in an awkward location; however, the controls work great and are sturdier than any other model I have ever owned.     I purchased mine from Coffee N Kitchen at www. 
coffee sipping hot ,
Makes a decent cup of coffee.  The carafe can be difficult to pour from.  Either it comes out unevenly and slowly spills or you have to pour it out at a very slow pace.  Besides that it performs quite well. 
Makes a decent cup of coffee ,
  Unfortunately, performed fine in auto-brew mode.   As with most glass coffeemakers, it was easier to clean than the thermal carafe's.   Unfortunately, my kids broke the pot when they were trying to help clean dishes.   It didn't fair so well against the tile floor.   My wife prefers the thermal carafe, so we went with one of those for the replacement. My only complaint was the clock. 
help clean dishes ,prefers the thermal carafe ,
Works great, good coffee, hot, looks great.   Some drawbacks -     Very hard to read the little window that shows how many cups have been brewed - possible light pipe addition to illuminate.     Adding water - do not like the fill container and dump into small opening.  I use a faucet with flex hose nozzle on it to directly fill. 
read the little window ,
  Works as described, takes little room on the counter and the coffees and teas you can buy, rivals whats on the shelf in your supermarket.  Its so easy to use, no mess and you can take it anywhere.   I recently brought it to a birthday party and made guests their preference of coffees and tea selections.   It made a big hit.  I was skeptical about the tea, but it actually came out darker and had more flavor that a brewed cup using a tea bag. 
takes little room on the counter ,
  I loved the classy, sleek lines and I thought anything can keep coffee hotter than the one I had.   ( It would brew lukewarm, I need to write a rewview on that one . )    I wanted hot coffee and I got just that - good, hot coffee.  I love coffee so hot I have to carefully sip it. 
wanted hot coffee ,
  Has great features. It has some sort of Achilles heel in its design.   I had one and then after 6 months the reservoir would no longer hold water.   Called, complained, got a new unit.   Due to a shipping error they sent me two new units.   All three have done the same thing. 
got a new unit ,
This is the worst coffee maker that I have used.  The cover for the carafe does not fit well and for that reason my carafe broke after just 3 months.  The coffee is not hot and there is water leaking from the water chamber.  The pause and serve does not work well, so the warming plate is quite discoloured from drips.  Very disappointing. 
coffee is not hot ,
 I am a huge coffee drinker (about 3 cups/day).  I live alone and always hated brewing a whole pot of coffee every time I want just one cup.  That method often wastes precious coffee grounds.  My new Keurig Mini allows me to brew one cup at a time which means each cup is fresh.  The machine is compact so it fits in the tightest spaces.  Perfect for small NYC kitchens with limited counter space. 
am a huge coffee drinker ,wastes precious coffee grounds ,
I know I read others reviews, but these faults weren't mentioned.   Water becomes trapped in-between the inner and outer carafe thanks to a poor seal on the rubber gasket which supposedly seals between the two.   Now my carafe is heavy with water I can't get out and I hear water sloshing around inside.   My other (major) gripe is that the electronic controls are on the front bottom of the machine.   Did they think no one would put a wet, i.  dripping carafe back on it's plate. 
carafe is heavy ,
 I waited approximately 4 weeks to receive the wrong part.  It was a brew basket for an espresso maker - not even close.  I sent it back adhering to all the policies stated in the packing slip, and stating they sent an incorrect part.  A couple of weeks went by and I was apparently reimbursed for the cost of shipping their incorrect part back - no communication from them whatsoever.  I waited 3 more weeks for the part to arrive.  I contacted their so called customer service and they told me they had cancelled the order and refunded my money. 
receive the wrong part ,
Always something going wrong.      So the hamilton beach give me everything i need, coffee get warm, good flavor, and perfect every time.  Easy to clean and easy access to the filter area and the water area.  The only bad thing is the power switch that have no automatic off. 
coffee get warm ,
  It is incredibly simple to use and the espresso is great.   The crema is perfect too.   My latte's rival those in coffee houses and I am saving a ton of money.   The "capsules" must be ordered from the Nespresso website, but they are usually at your door in 48 hours via UPS.   They give you a choice in the strength that you prefer and the capsules are cheaper than buying "pods".   The machine doesn't have a steamer/frother on it, but I bought the Nespresso Aeroccino to heat/froth the milk and I am very pleased with it. 
capsules are cheaper ,
Overall you will like this coffee maker if u want a thermal coffee maker that is easy to use, and retro-Euro styled.   The product seems really well made, was easy to set up and a bit larger than most others we are accustomed to.     However we like rather strong roasts such as Expresso and Italian roast.  The machine does not have a feature found on less expensive machines that is used for the times when u want to make 1 to 4 cups.  Therefore, it required nearly double the amount of grounds to get a taste that was to our liking since we typically brew in small amounts. 
want a thermal coffee maker ,
Our Saeco coffee maker pours a delicious pot of piping hot coffee all over our counter top.  As if cleaning up an entire pot of coffee off your counter isn't enough a 3rd degree burn really gets your day going.  All I really want at 6am is a coffee .  For the high price of this coffee maker, I would have expected better.  Customer Service has been less than helpful and eventually agreed to send us a new lid.  This however did not rectify the problem and now it is no longer under warranty. 
pot of piping hot ,
  It kills to me pay $6 for a coffee every day, and this works out to less than a dollar and it still tastes great.   I use the latte and hot chocolate a lot.   I am not a big fan of Nabob coffee so I don&#146t drink the coffee, the do have Starbucks brand out now, but the price on those is about double.  Though still a better deal than stopping at one.   It is fairly nice looking and not a big obtrusive thing sitting on your counter. 
price on those is about double ,
  As I use this on my sailboat, the fact that is unbreakable product is key.   The design is better than my home one as it has a filter on the pouring side, which keeps any grinds in the press (out of my cup).     The service from the Beaver Creek Shop / Handy House was excellent.   No whining about shipping to Canada and at an excellent price.   Even a personal follow-up on the mailing and arrival of the package. 
design is better ,
This is the worst coffee maker I've ever used.   My sister gave it to me because she is blind and she couldn't use it.   I don't love anything about it and I hate everything. 
is the worst coffee maker ,
Our previous B&D SpaceMakers were great, but Model ODC405 is a total failure.   With good eyesight I have difficulty reading the LCD display.       Installation was easier than with previous models, but with only a minimal amount of space saved.      The fact that B&D keeps this inferior product on the market tells me to make my future small appliance purchases from another manufacturer. 
keeps this inferior product on the market ,
  It makes good coffee, but it always has a little water standing under the unit after each brewing.   Often coffee drips around carafe instead of into it.      I contacted customer service today about the problem and they said their records indicated the purchase date was in 2004.   Fortunately, I had the purchase receipt and faxed it to them to prove my 12 month warranty is still in effect. 
has a little water ,
I've always used Bunn coffee makers for 20+ years, but the Bunn Thermal maker is the worst coffee maker I've ever had.   It starts brewing immediately even with the top open, so we can't use the pot to measure and pour the water into the system.   It also starts pouring so quicly that it floods the top of the pot and spills all over my counter. 
is the worst coffee maker ,
 At just about $100, we expected more.   The pause and serve feature does not work, coffee continues to pour out, and the hotplate has peeled because of it.  The pot fits so tightly under the coffeemaker that it is difficult to snap into place.  The lid to the coffee pot is very hard to take off and put back on.  This would be an extremely hard coffeemaker to use if I were elderly or had arthritis. 
difficult to snap into place ,
I just received my  Bunn NHBX-B 10-Cup Coffee Maker and after carefully following directions made my first cup of coffee for my husband.   He said it was the best cup of coffee he had had in a long time.   As long as it keeps up the good work, I will give this coffee maker 5 stars for coffee.   Be sure to read that closing the lid starts the hot water flowing rather than a switch. 
starts the hot water ,
Bought it more for the thermal carafe than anything.   Coffee quality was average.   Hot plate wouldn't stay on more than a few minutes and wouldn't recycle to ON when turning unit off then on again.   Carafe didn't keep coffee hot more than about half an hour.   It went back to the store. 
Coffee quality was average ,
I cannot be happier with this machine.   It works quickly, like a charm.   Coffee is very  hot (would not want it hotter).   I've been wetting the pods beforehand and using the tea button to brew my coffee -- could not be happier with the results.       We bought this machine for an office setting, so that people could choose their own drinks with little to no clean up.   Now I'm wishing I had one at home too. 
Coffee is very hot ,
 Pre-placement of the cup is crucial (no time to be reaching into the cabinet).  If the cup is large, I recommend a two-step approach.  There is some dripping during the process from the maker but it is minimal. We use the delay brew function often to pre-brew the coffee.  I have it timed to be ready when I typically reach the kitchen in the morning but no problem if I am early.  The program is overridden by a push of the brew button and the maker can finish 8-cups in under 5-minutes. 
cup is large ,
It is impossible to clean this coffee maker.  The grounds basket gets very nasty, and is grooved, which makes it awkward to get clean.  The carafe has a piece of plastic that the lid is mounted to, that somehow captures coffee underneath it.  Even after washing the carafe, old coffee still drips out from under it.  There is also a metal band around the carafe base that mysteriously catches coffee in the same way.  The maker is so bad, that it's kind of a final joke that pouring coffee out of the carafe is like using a dribble glass. 
grounds basket gets very nasty ,maker is so bad ,
 I'd like it.   I did not care for the cleaning cycle on this maker.   It takes a ton of time and the cleaning solution is too expensive.   I've learned that cleaning this machine is much cheaper and easier with a water and vinegar mixture.   I fill the carafe with 10 cups of water and 2 cups of water and run it through the regular brew cycle. 
cleaning solution is too expensive ,machine is much cheaper ,
This is the worst coffee maker I have ever had and I have owned Many thru the years.  Oh yes it gets more coffee on the counter than in my CUP. I would recomend you skip this thing and make your life easier. 
is the worst coffee maker ,
I had to write a review after seeing other negative ones, wow.   Must say we had ZERO problems with the "plumbed" unit and we've had it 4 years now. I'm actually considering buying a second unit off ebay for our vacation condo. 
review after seeing other negative ,
 We knew Bunn was the only way to go, so I shopped around for the best price on the web and found a place in Illinois that was $215. 00 with free shipping (dccoffeeproducts).  Once we received it unpacked it, followed the directions, it was making coffee for us instantaneously.  The only downfall I could think of is it needs enough counter-space.  We have ours caddy-cornered and it fits nicely right under the cabinet, but needs to stick out a little to pour the water in.  So if you are tight on counter-space, I wouldn't recommend it. 
are tight on counter-space ,
 I called the company and they want a receipt.  Like I have one after 6 months.  I offered to mail pot but no way.  This is the last Black and Decker named product I will buy.  They sold their name to another company and this company's products are very poor.  This is the second B&D coffee maker I bought in a year. 
products are very poor ,
 Our next coffeemaker won't have a beeper or I will disable it.     It is poorly designed in that the filter basket often gets stuck.  It's hard to fill the narrow water holder without spilling, because the lid of the water holder and the lid of the coffee pot interfere.  If you forget to orient the coffee pot between the arrows, it will brew hot coffee on your countertop.  You can't remove the coffee pot lid, so forget about getting it to sit open end down in the dishwasher.  Do the people who design this stuff ever use it in a home. 
fill the narrow water holder without spilling ,sit open end ,
  It takes entirely too long to brew coffee - approximately 5-7 minutes for 8 cups on strong setting.   The normal setting is faster (2-3 minutes for 8 cups), but the coffee looks and tastes like dirty water.  The carafe doesn't completely empty.   An inner lip in the proprietary carafe allows about a tablespoon of liquid to remain in the pot at all times.   The only way to empty it is to turn the carafe completely upside down and shake the pot. We will be looking for a coffee maker that makes strong brew faster and doesn't have a proprietary carafe. 
carafe does n't completely empty ,
 I have had less expensive machines that hold up better and work at least as well if not better.     As far as I am concerned I would not purchase anything that this company has to offer.     Their grinder has been a problem as well the plastic has cracked twice and at least the store where I purchased it took it back and replaced it.     BTW I am in the marked for a new high end "installed" espresso machine think the Miele is a Much better machine. 
have had less expensive machines ,is a Much better machine ,
  The dripless carafe isn't dripless.   The worst feature is the water level indicator.   It is  a tiny tube that is hard to read even when you bend down to get a bird's eye view.   It also get bubbles in it that frustrate the process even more.  I like the clean lines and the display.   Overall, too many frustrations for an $80 machine. 
is a tiny tube ,
Makes the best coffee.  Easy to use takes up about as much space as a large brewer.  Once the brew temp is set you can make up to 5 pots of coffee.  The price is better than some of the "comercial" units being sold at local retailers. 
price is better ,
  Its hard to explain, but a major design flaw. - The area below the express maker is too high for an express cup and too low for a standard express pot.   Still haven't found something that fits properly.  - The steaming element is very short and it is impossible to remove your espresso without hitting this very hot element. - The espresso is never very hot. This is not my first machine and I'm disappointed. 
hitting this very hot element ,element is very short ,
 If you don't, it will overflow and make a mess.  (Yes, I learned this the hard way. ) The coffee is plenty hot enough for me and the carafe does a good job of keeping it warm for hours.  Since there's no heating plate doing the warming it will cool down over time but you don't end up with bitter, burned, awful tasting coffee.  The pouring feature of the carafe is its weakest point.  It does drip along the spout when you pour. 
coffee is plenty hot ,
 The poor design of this coffee maker precludes that.  Like the other reviewers I found a lot of coffee spewing on my counter tops and floor due to poor carafe and filter basket design.  When I emailed Mr Coffee suggesting that they review and revamp this design, I was sent a new coffee maker of a different style.    In addition, the coffee is not hot in the carafe,  lukewarm would more aptly describe it.  The "thermal" carafe does NOT keep the coffee lukewarm for 4 hours as advertised. 
coffee is not hot ,
This coffee maker has a good design, but the materials seem rather cheap (to go along with the price).  It had a very strong plastic smell when I first opened it.  I ran many cups of hot water through it, then let it sit for several months and the smell seemed to go away.  It has not worked since. 
had a very strong plastic smell ,
 It comes with three grounds holders, 1-cup, 2-cup, and one for the PODS.  As most of the Espresso makers on the market, you can't use a standard size cup to collect your java, they're way too tall.  The mechanism is simple and you manually control the amount of water dispensed.      Coffee Section: As eluded to by a previous reviewer, the production of coffee is really s-l-o-w. 
mechanism is simple ,
           2.   On the negative side, however, the coffee isn't hot, even if you get it right after it's brewed.  At least it's not very hot so it doesn't hurt.  By the time you add cream, the coffee is lukewarm, and any coffee in the thermal carafe gets cooler.   The instruction booklet says to rinse the carafe with hot water before brewing coffee, but it seems like an OOPS. 
coffee is n't hot ,
1st machine lasted less than two weeks.  Well, 2 points for DeLonghi - except this one only lasted a few days.  It's now coming up on two years and the 3rd machine is in the shop.  Delonghi still won't give us our money back.  I'm wondering which of their assets they would do without for two years.  (other than their customer relations department). 
machine lasted less ,
    The coffee is brewed at 204F according to my thermometer in the basket, which is within standard tolerance of ideal temperature.  The spray head ix excellent with many holes giving complete wetting of the grounds.     One should not overfill the basket.     The taste is pretty good if you use good beans.  I grind mine fresh from premium beans, but it makes acceptable coffee   from pre-ground Folgers Colombian as well. 
holes giving complete ,
Our coffee maker died just before Christmas so we purchased this coffee maker because of the nice looks and the name.  We have yet to have a hot cup of coffee from the thermal container.  The program works wonderfully but if you don't get up before the coffee maker starts and warm the thermal carafe then the coffee is room temperature.  Well, then what good is the programing.  I was really excited about getting the maker but very disappointed with the outcome. 
warm the thermal carafe ,
Purchased this model at Costco for their wonderful returns reputation; I have a bad luck curse with electronics.     I have had this coffee brewer for almost 1 year, with zero complaints.   It is programmable, the hot plate temp.  is adjustable, and it has a lit up clock with the warmer timer displayed for count-down.   It came with a fancy charcoal filter for the water, and is very handy for our [off the charts] hard water.   There is also a button for regular, or strong brew, which we use most often. 
have a bad luck curse with electronics ,
I've tried just about every coffee maker there is and this is my favorite.  Easy to use.  I was not sure how I would like it without the pot.  You get up to pour coffee from the carafe, now I get up to have hot coffee dispensed right into my cup. 
have hot coffee ,
BIGGEST PROBLEM: Makes a piping hot cup of coffee, but if you let it sit for 5 minutes, the pot warmer BURNS the entire pot of joe.  even on the lower heat setting. Brew basket and pot need to be PERFECTLY aligned, otherwise the coffee dribbles across the coffee pot top and FLOODS the counter. POOR MANUFACTURING QUALITY 1) My brew basket handle broke due to thermal cycling after a year. 
brew basket handle broke due ,
  From the start I had my doubts about it once I opened it up and now am considering dumping it and getting another coffee maker.   The built-in plastic filter basket that this unit uses just wont' give up it's plastic odor.   Also cleaning the mesh material that is used as the filter is nearly impossible.   Another failure of the unit is with the carafe.   The curved lip in the glass for pouring fails to keep the coffee going where you want it pour unless you are extremely patient and pour very slowly.   Go too fast and you end up with coffee on your countertop. 
's plastic odor ,
I am quite surprised by all of the negative reviews about this coffee maker.   I've had mine for 4 1/2 years now and have had no problems with overflows, clogged filters, shattered glass, or lukewarm coffee.   The cap on the carafe is open when brewing (that's how the coffee gets in there) and remains open while sitting under the brewer.  If you leave it there you'll likely have lukewarm coffee within 30 minutes.   So please remove it if you want hot coffee hours after it's initial brewing. 
cap on the carafe is open ,
 The service department is helpful and you usually get the technician on the phone quickly.  It takes a month to ship your machine to the service department and get it returned, so I have Gaggia Classic machine as a backup.  You do need to keep the packaging to return your unit for service.  The steamer on the S-7 is a little weak so frothing can be difficult.  Programing the  S-7 for your individual tastes is easy. 
is a little weak so frothing ,
The coffee maker should have come with directions "how to pour a cup of coffee without making a big mess".  Have a roll of paper towels close when you try pouring.  It's frustrating and sometimes hilarious.  Black & Decker needs to stick to making tools, not appliances. 
making a big mess ,
This coffee maker is practically finished after 10 months.  The auto function/clock is ruined from condensation.  Dealing with their customer service has been a nightmare and this is the worst coffee maker I've ever owned. 
is the worst coffee maker ,
The pause and serve function does not pause and serve.  The filter basket swings out mid-brew - as soon as the water starts to drip into the carafe.  This means hot coffee is dripping all over my desk, ruining papers, etc if I don't hold the filter basket in place.     This may be a random event, specific to the coffeemaker I purchased.  or it might be something that occurs with all of them.   Nevertheless, I plan to return to sender ASAP. 
means hot coffee ,
CD player, TV, Microwave. The clock is no big deal to me).  The water is filtered, the gold filter is included, the brew time is quite fast.  The coffee tastes as good (if not better) as that from any other home coffeemaker I've experienced. 
brew time is quite fast ,
The lateral columnator allows one to accurately make up to 8 cups of coffee. The filter basket obviates the need for paper filters because the basket is easily removeable and can be washed in a dishwasher. The metallic container is virtually unbreakable and has a well insulated handle for pouring hot coffee. The container keeps coffee hot for a long time. 
pouring hot coffee ,
  As one reviewer noted, the pot will spill a little water if you pour it too fast, but that is the only complaint.   It does not over heat the water or the coffee once it is brewed.   What attracted me to this model was that it was black and it was not a space hog on the kitchen counter.   It has a narrow foot print compared to many coffee makers today.   My only fear is that this model will no longer be available when it gives up the ghost. 
has a narrow foot print ,
 Set the carafe slightly off center and coffee spills outside the carafe.  Get the filter a bit folded over when closing, the coffee is either very weak or coffee flows outside carafe and onto counter.  The display on the bottom is very hard to see at night and difficult to set the auto brew. Despite all this, we still loved our coffee maker until the multiple overflows dripped into the display panel BELOW the carafe - BAD DESIGN.  The coffee maker still works, but the clock and auto brew features don't. 
display on the bottom is very hard ,
The coffee maker is decent, BUT, the carafe is a mess.   It drips whether you are pouring water into the maker or pouring coffee into a cup.   Every time we pour, we have to move the coffee maker close to the sink so we can pour over the sink to avoid the clean up.   We have even tried to open the lid while pouring, pouring from different angles, etc. I ended up purchasing a replacement carafe, which is pouring without spilling.   But for the cost of the coffee maker and then the additional carafe, spend your money on a different coffee maker. 
coffee maker is decent ,
 First off, it makes ok tasting coffee but nothing to write home about.  And that is only if you clean it thoroughly and often.  The carafe on this coffee pot is absolutely terrible.  When you pour the water into the reservoir the water ends up EVERYWHERE but where you want it to go. 
coffee pot is absolutely terrible ,
 I contacted Ariete's customer service directly and they kindly asked me to send the machine to their service rep that they provided.  Sent the machine off and it was returned still broken.  I asked Ariete to kindly replace the machine and they left me high and dry with a broken machine.  The price is not a six month price and shipping a espresso machine is not cheap. 
espresso machine is not cheap ,
