  The performance of this product is excellent, with no leakage, no spilling, no excessive steam spewing out.   Brewing: It is fairly quick to brew.   The coffee is quite hot (an important point for me).   During brewing, no water spills out (something that happened regularly with one of my previous big-bucks models).   No excessive steam.
performance of this product is excellent ,fairly quick to brew ,coffee is quite hot ,
excessive steam,big bucks,excellent product,hot point,important point,
The water tank has a level ball and cup indicator on the side of the pot.   The ball does not always go up with the water without a tap but the water remains clearly visible in the indicator.     The digital timer buttons are the real downside to this pot.   They are roughly 1/2 inch long a just about 1/8 inch wide.   They can be awkward to hold down and set.
water remains clearly visible in the indicator ,timer buttons are the real downside ,awkward to hold ,
real downside,wide inch,digital timer,visible indicator,
The lid has to be almost completely unscrewed to pour the coffee without it coming from the little hole in the top of the lid.   I found this out when I didn&#146t unscrew it all the way and got burned.     The inside of the carafe is just like some thermos bottles and can be broken if dropped very hard.      My recommendation is not to buy this coffee maker.   There are better coffee makers out there for the money you would pay for this one.   Try a Bunn for a little more money and faster better tasting coffee.
almost completely unscrewed to pour ,better coffee makers ,little more money ,
146t way,better tasting,little hole,more money,unscrewed coffee,
The transparent plastic window built on the side indicates exactly how much water you actually poured into the coffee maker.         With that much said, It finally gave way today.  This coffee pot produced great results and provided many pots of coffee, but with hidden flaws, it services are now rendered due to it's only flaw.     CONS      Although this coffee maker has out-performed every coffee maker put to the test so far, it also came with a major flaw: The hot plate.        The materials made for this plate is ferrous.  It rusts within a year, interrupting it's peak performance.
coffee pot produced great results ,CONS Although this coffee maker has out-performed ,plate is ferrous ,
hot plate,much water,ferrous plate,major flaw,many pots,
You can use the carafe when you're at home or brew just a mug to take to work with you.     There are just a couple of negatives about this coffee maker.   One is that it's somewhat hard to fill the water tank.   It seems that the top does not open quite wide enough or stay open by itself long enough to get the water poured in.   My advice is to use a regular measuring cup with a spout to pour the water in rather than the carafe.
somewhat hard to fill ,top does not open ,use a regular measuring cup ,
enough top,open water,wide top,open top,hard water,
Thermal CarafeI've been wanting a thermal carafe for some time because I hate the way coffee tastes after it sits on the burner.   This coffee pot automatically turns itself off when it's finished brewing so there's no extra cook time to make the coffee taste bitter. I also thought that silver would look nice on the counter because it would match the stainless appliances in the kitchen.   I found it to look a little cheap, but it is acceptable. My excitement for the thermal carafe ended when I realized the drawbacks outweighed the benefit.
no extra cook time ,look nice on the counter ,match the stainless appliances in the kitchen ,
thermal carafe,extra cook,nice counter,stainless appliances,bitter taste,
Grins: The stylish looks.   The instructions are clear and use is simple.   Priming is easily done and the water container smoothly removed, filled and replaced for use.  Switch it on, lift the lever, pop in a pod, lower the lever, select the size of cup, press the brew button and off you go.   We haven&#146t had any trouble so far fitting coffee pods of different brands into the deep brown cradle or tea pods into the green one.     Gripes: It does tend to drip a bit after it has finished.
use is simple ,instructions are clear ,so far fitting coffee pods ,
brown cradle,deep cradle,simple use,stylish looks,green pods,
I had a great coffee maker that stopped working after 10 years.   When it came time to replace it, I decided to buy the Black & Decker Spacemaker.   The main reason I wanted this coffee maker was that it was programmable and was affordable.     SPACE:  The SpaceMaker is actually bigger than I thought, so it does not really clear up much counter space.   However, the little bit that it does open up is perfect for small items.
had a great coffee maker ,SpaceMaker is actually bigger ,up much counter space ,
clear counter,small items,affordable maker,programmable maker,little bit,
This is the worst design for a coffee maker that I have ever seen.   The company obviously did not test this product before selling it.   I had to return this item to the manufacturer after only six months of use.   Although they replaced the first coffee maker, the second one has the same faulty design problems.   The ground basket frequently overflows causing a huge mess and the flow will often 'short-out' the electronics that make the coffee maker work.
replaced the first coffee maker ,one has the same faulty design problems ,overflows causing a huge mess ,
worst design,huge mess,second one,same design,faulty design,
It's also very convenient for a cup of tea or cocoa for those who do not want coffee or when you want a change of beverage during the day.  The product variations are great, but the espresso, cocoa, cappuchino, etc.  are not as easy to find.   They can be found online if necessary.      It's nearly maintenance free.
very convenient for a cup of tea ,product variations are great ,not as easy to find ,
convenient cup,free maintenance,great variations,
This coffee maker offers 24-hour programming with a digital clock timer.   Very easy to use and settings are precise.   It also comes with a temperature range adjuster so you can keep the pot warm or hot.   I like to keep it in the middle so my coffee does not turn to mud while I finish my pot.
coffee maker offers 24-hour programming ,Very easy to use ,settings are precise ,
precise settings,digital clock,middle coffee,easy settings,warm pot,
  With the cuisinart I make 10 cups and get 10 cups of coffee. I found it easy to program the time and set it to automatically turn on in the morning.   It also has the option to brew a small pot of coffee (1 to 4 cups), which I have not tried yet.   There is also the option to turn the grinder off if you have pre-ground beans.   I used this function when I brought it home to clean the machine with water before making any coffee. The grinder holds enough beans to make a strong pot of coffee, and the grinder is about as loud as my traditional coffee grinder.
easy to program the time ,brew a small pot of coffee ,have pre-ground beans ,grinder is about as loud ,make a strong pot of coffee ,
easy time,loud coffee,small pot,strong pot,traditional coffee,
Pre-setting mode for 24 hours timings    3.  Two-hour auto shut-off: Safety features keeps the coffee warm for 2 hours after you brew, then automatically turns off    10. Removable filter basket-Removable filter basket allows you to easily lift to add and remove filter and after use easy cleaning. Water Window-Water window on the water reservoir so you can see exactly how much water you have added.     Very easy instruction to follow.  You cannot make a bad pot of coffee unless you do not add enough coffee grinds or forget to add and just have hot water ha ha.
Very easy instruction ,have hot water ha ha ,make a bad pot of coffee ,
Removable filter,hot water,much water,warm coffee,easy cleaning,
With the fineness set to the mark second from the left and the Strong setting on the control panel I was able to achieve a very nice cup of coffee.     The unit also features a charcoal water filter which may or may not be necessary depending on whether or not you use bottled water.   If you do use bottled water the filter element is easily removed.   A full pot takes about 12 minutes to complete.  That way you can use the Luxe to make flavored coffees and not void the warranty.
able to achieve ,very nice cup of coffee ,use bottled water ,features a charcoal water filter ,do use bottled water the filter element ,make flavored coffees ,
bottled water,full pot,flavored coffees,necessary filter,able panel,
But in general, time in the pot, and heat are coffee's enemy.       The principle behind any drip coffee maker is pretty simple: Heat water, let it drip through some ground coffee, and you are ready to sip away.  There are some variables to consider.  First and most important: use quality freshly roasted whole beans.  Grind them immediately before brewing.
drip coffee maker is pretty simple ,ready to sip ,freshly roasted whole beans ,
general time,simple Heat,whole beans,important use,ready coffee,
Along with the coffee unit, you get 2 mugs and a couple of #2 coffee filters so you can make coffee as soon as you open the box.     The Coffee Unit is black and the two 14 ounce mugs are stainless steel with rubber, nonslip grips around the middle.  I put a cotton wrist band over the grip so that a larger area is available for his hand and this seems to work fine.      The lids fit on securely, helping to keep the coffee hot.  Their extra deep sipping well and the rubber pads on the bottom help to prevents spills.      I have read that the mugs and their lids are dishwasher-safe and I have read where they are not.
ounce mugs are stainless steel with rubber ,Coffee Unit is black ,area is available ,lids are dishwasher-safe ,
black Unit,extra rubber,stainless steel,hot coffee,available area,
We do not drink very much coffee, so this coffeemaker is excellent.  It's very easy to use and quick.    I even make coffee for one with the Bialetti Class 6-Cup Coffee Maker.   Experience with it.  Like if you are trying out a new recipe.  Use different brands of espresso coffee, vary with the amount of coffee.
not drink very much coffee ,coffeemaker is excellent ,very easy to use ,
new recipe,different brands,much coffee,excellent coffeemaker,
This front-swinging unit has a tendency to pop open DURING BREWING unless you *slam* it shut and push hard to make *sure* it's shut before brewing.   Of course, when it swings open during brewing, disaster happens with water and coffee all over the place.   Lastly, a minor beef.   The stainless steel body looks nice, but it's a pain in the rear to keep clean.       One good thing I found is that this unit has a special button on it for when you are brewing 1-4 cups of coffee.   It changes the brewing characteristics and makes the small amount of coffee come out tasting good and not burnt and/or watery.
pop open DURING BREWING ,push hard to make ,swings open during brewing ,steel body looks nice ,unit has a special button ,
open BREWING,sure brewing,clean rear,good thing,stainless steel,
We seem to go through coffee pots - not able to settle on one that we like.     The Hamilton Beach 47111 12 cup coffee maker is fine for the purpose of making coffee, but we may well be on our way to purchasing something else.     Pros -   It brews quickly, there is no carafe to break and the coffee does taste good.     Cons -   The interior has a bucket [with handle] that you have to remove, fill with water and the fill the reservoir.   It is hard to read, prior to pouring, how much water you have put in the bucket [You are able to see once you pour it in how much, but barely].
cup coffee maker is fine ,coffee does taste good ,hard to read ,
good coffee,able bucket,much water,fine maker,hard water,
Results:  After mastering the loading of the unit, the results were mediocre at best.   The process by which the water is heated appears to add some bitterness to the water.   I have tried both tap and bottled water.   At first, I thought it may have just been the coffee singles (Folgers).  I determined that it was not, after using the coffee in a cup brewed in the microwave.     The process of heating the water is also very loud.
results were mediocre ,water is heated ,water is also very loud ,
mediocre results,heated water,loud water,bottled water,best results,
Overall this was very disappointing because of the time I invested in it to get it "clean" the time to buy it/then return it and my burned hand.   Too top it all off the coffee tastes burnt EVERY-TIME.   With different brands of coffee (and cold water, removing as soon as it's done brewing I'm really trying to make this work. ) so it is going back to the store tomorrow and I will find a different maker.
buy it\/then return ,very disappointing because of the time ,coffee tastes burnt EVERY-TIME ,find a different maker ,
cold water,burned hand,disappointing time,top coffee,burnt EVERY,
(any coffee remaining in the pot is certain to become cold fast, as the heating element beneath it turns off as soon as the coffee is made. ) as i enjoy my coffee from an extra-large-sized coffee cup, after only a few minutes, it was at an unacceptable drinking temperature.  also, although there is a digital clock on the front, it needs to be reset every time the coffee maker is unplugged.  the instruction manual suggests unplugging the unit when not in use.  lastly, i found the overall design to be rather bulky, taking up premium counter space.  in short, this black and decker coffee maker was a waste of my valuable time.
pot is certain to become ,time the coffee maker is unplugged ,a digital clock on the front ,found the overall design ,
unacceptable drinking,certain pot,premium counter,extra coffee,valuable time,
I've wanted a coffee maker for ages, do not drink instant stuff, but really enjoy a cup of "real" coffee.  I only had one of those cafetiere(. ) things which is more like a coffee pot but makes a decent cup.  My mum bought me this one, and I have to say it makes really awful tasting coffee.  I always used - I do not use it any more - the double sized pods for one mug or two small cups, but even then it's weak, watery and just plain nasty.
not drink instant stuff ,makes a decent cup ,makes really awful tasting coffee ,
watery cups,instant stuff,plain cups,real coffee,decent cup,
After experimenting with the various controls, I find the Jura-Capresso CoffeeTeam makes the best coffee that I have ever tasted.  I selected this pot because the bean bin can hold a few days worth, and it is easy to adjust the flavor.  And, there are no grounds everywhere as happened with a seperate bur grinder.  Please redesign the pot, though, to correct the flaws.
Jura-Capresso CoffeeTeam makes the best coffee ,hold a few days ,easy to adjust ,
few days,various controls,worth days,best coffee,seperate bur,
  The Tassimo does a reasonable job of making that morning cup of coffee the best that it can be.   At a cost of $120, I will confess that I expected more.   While I have not tried the Keurig, I have heard positive comments that have made me regret this purchase.   The Tassimo coffee is more expensive and harder to find than the Keurig cups.
have heard positive comments ,harder to find than the Keurig cups ,Tassimo coffee is more expensive ,
positive comments,reasonable job,harder Keurig,expensive coffee,best coffee,
  Blade grinders like the Cuisanart, I learned, heated the beans and tended to give them a burnt flavor.   The conical burr grinder was gentler (although a bit slower) and did not adversely affect the taste of the beans. The Capresso is extremely easy to use.   In most cases you'll only do this once or twice until you find the setting that works best for you.   Add beans to the hopper, and water, and you're ready to brew.   You can use the permanent gold filter that is provided, or paper filters (which I prefer as they make for easier cleanup.
burr grinder was gentler ,Capresso is extremely easy to use ,ready to brew ,use the permanent gold filter ,
easier cleanup,burnt flavor,permanent gold,gentler grinder,most cases,
We are using the same coffee as in the other machines so I know that the DeLonghi is great Too bad that it has the big leaking problem, so sad. This seems to me like the engineering of this product is not good , they could fix this leaking problem if they wanted to.  I was slow to react to the situation, if I did not like the coffee so much I would have just tossed it out in the trash.
DeLonghi is great ,using the same coffee ,engineering of this product is not good ,
good product,big problem,slow situation,great DeLonghi,other machines,
This is the ultimate cheaper coffee maker.  It has an extra heater that raises the temp of the water just before it hits the grounds, extracting a fuller flavor from the beans.   the draw back is the tall carafe, not top shelve dishwasher friendly.   Ours broke after 2 years and I instantly ordered another.
has an extra heater ,extracting a fuller flavor from the beans ,the tall carafe ,
friendly dishwasher,fuller flavor,top shelve,cheaper coffee,ultimate coffee,
As stated earlier, the features of this coffee maker are hard to beat.  I was unable to find all this has to offer in even the highest priced units.  Will update next month. Keeping fingers crossed. June 18, 2009 Update.
features of this coffee maker are hard ,unable to find ,update next month ,
hard maker,highest units,unable units,next month,
Coffee is hot after brewing.  The carafe stays hot for several hours and there is no burnt coffee or automatic shut off to contend with like regular makers.      Cleaning is a breeze.  Traditional makers I found are difficult to clean under the drip above the grinds and around the burner.  This maker has no burner and the drip above the grinds is easily wiped down with a cloth.
Coffee is hot after brewing ,carafe stays hot ,found are difficult to clean ,
Traditional makers,several hours,difficult makers,burnt coffee,hot carafe,
First, I will explain how this nifty coffee gizmo works, and then I will explain why I've rated it poorly.   Filling the water reservoir is fairly easy with the included carafe, because the carafe is not as spill-prone as most.   It is easy to see the water levels in the reservoir, even in the grey, bleary-eyed twilight of pre-caffeine mornings.   Filling the grind compartment is also a snap because the whole thing comes out of the machine.   The final component is the filter basket, which Cuisinart made accessible by a spring-loaded basket that swivels out and away from the machine.   Steamy grounds also have a tendency to collect on the cover for the filter basket, so make sure to rinse that out right away as well.
water reservoir is fairly easy ,Filling the grind compartment ,Cuisinart made accessible ,
nifty coffee,final component,sure basket,most carafe,grind compartment,
The only real draw back I see so far , is cleaning the top part where the coffee brews.  It does have a removable container where you put the filter in to brew, but its the part under that , that is harder to clean.  There is not that much , but enough where you want to get it out.  I guess its just awkward to wipe it up.  Also the water well is very hard to clean out , very deep , and I can not get my hand in there to wipe it out.
cleaning the top part ,harder to clean ,does have a removable container ,very hard to clean ,
removable container,top part,only draw,hard water,real draw,
It is very straightforward.   It makes 12 cups; it has one button (on/off); it turns itself off after two hours; is easy to clean; was reasonably priced ($49.     Other reviewers have said that it is cheaply made.   I think that the plastic is as strong as any other pot I've purchased.   The lid and surrounding edge of the coffee pot are a light gray plastic.   It cleans up very easily and is less prone to stain than the ones that are all white.
easy to clean ,coffee pot are a light gray plastic ,less prone to stain ,
prone ones,easy hours,light plastic,gray plastic,other pot,
  The lid on the carafe just had small slits for the brewed coffee to go through, so it could be easily clogged.   I was too afraid to set the programmable timer for morning because I could be waking up to another mess.   After it had happened countless times, the clock no longer worked so, no timer anymore.   I finally stopped the overflow by buying a permanent filter that would not fold over by water pressure. That is it for me.
too afraid to set ,had happened countless times ,overflow by buying a permanent filter ,
programmable timer,small slits,permanent filter,afraid timer,countless times,
I think this will be around for three to four months before I start looking for a replacement.    The good points to this are that it brews fast; my old coffee pot felt like it took forever to make a half pot.   Seriously.   I'm not saying this is lightening fast but three minutes for five cups is pretty damn good if you ask me.   That's another thing I needed to get used to; this is a twelve cup coffee maker and I was used to a ten cup.    The numbers on the carafe are easy to ready and there are two water windows on the side of the coffee maker; both levels are exact.
cups is pretty damn good ,numbers on the carafe are easy ,levels are exact ,
ready carafe,exact levels,good cups,fast coffee,easy carafe,
They did have good customer service and did not charge me shipping for the new coffee maker.     This coffee maker has made fair coffee for me for about 2 years.   Usually coffee comes out tasting burnt or smelly from being burned.   There are several design issues that have made it difficult, including the grounds holder that is very hard to attach and detach.   The decanter lid always pops off when I am trying to wash it, and the decanter itself leaks all over the place.   This is especially true if it is full.
did have good customer service ,coffee maker has made fair coffee ,several design issues ,very hard to attach ,
new coffee,difficult grounds,good customer,hard holder,burnt tasting,
  The excess water is easy to remove by simply pulling  out the tray.   The tray also has a lid that you can remove or add to  accommodate larger coffee mugs.   I have found the heating process to be  quick, and have been able to enjoy my coffee or hot cocoa in about 3  minutes or less.   The Keurig also has an auto-off feature that will shut  off the appliance when not in use for about 2 minutes.   This version of  the Keurig is great for small spaces.
water is easy to remove ,accommodate larger coffee mugs ,has an auto-off feature ,version of the Keurig is great ,
less minutes,excess water,able coffee,easy water,quick process,
The removable filter basket is easy to clean, as is the espresso ground basket.  The milk storage tank is a bit more difficult to clean and remove.  Naturally, the machine is programmable, but the clock gains time randomly and it is quite annoying.  In an average month it probably gains 5-10 minutes.  But, as long as you remember to watch that the clock is close to the right time, the programmable function works fine.
filter basket is easy ,machine is programmable ,gains 5-10 minutes ,clock is close ,
removable filter,close clock,difficult bit,annoying time,easy basket,
Bought this coffee maker in 2002 and ca not wear it out. )    The machine is fast and keeps the coffee hot with excellent flavor for hours.  The automatic feature works fine and I always have a great pot of coffee waiting for me every morning.  The reasonable price @ around $39 or less if on sale, is terrific.  I just do not see spending $100 or more for fancier machines when this one makes as good a brew as any.
feature works fine ,have a great pot of coffee ,makes as good a brew ,
less sale,terrific sale,great pot,fine feature,excellent flavor,
I love my brewstation.   I have owned it for over a year and have not had a single problem.   I follow directions and make sure to turn the "pot" over and run waters thru it EVERY time I clean it.   I have never had a leak.   I use it daily and it makes great tasting coffee.   No spill from trying to pour from a carafe and coffee stays hot without getting cooked.
not had a single problem ,make sure to turn ,makes great tasting coffee ,
EVERY time,sure directions,daily tasting,great tasting,hot stays,
The coffee maker is black in color, and it can make up to 12 cups.  It has a glass pot, and on it there are white markings indicating how much is in the pot.  The pot also has a little flip top lid that can be taken off.  You can wash the pot in the dishwasher on the top rack.  This also has a pause and serve feature where you can take the pot out and pour yourself a cup while it is brewing.  My brother has no complaints about this coffee maker and he said the coffee was good.
coffee maker is black in color ,white markings ,has a little flip top lid ,
good coffee,flip lid,top rack,much markings,black color,
Coffee under the cabinet one died.  We were spoiled with the hot coffee our Mr.  Coffee Maker made.   This machine is well designed and very easy to use, however the coffee seemed warm and did not stay warm by the time you finnished your cup.  We returned the machine back to the store.
not stay warm by the time ,very easy to use ,coffee seemed warm ,
easy coffee,warm coffee,hot coffee,warm time,
The drip basket is very easy to remove for cleaning.     The timer controls seem average -- easy to set, but easy to bump and change the time of day.
drip basket is very easy to remove ,timer controls seem average ,easy to set ,easy to bump ,
easy time,average timer,easy basket,easy timer,
I&#146d been pricing these for about 2 years so when it got down to $40, I went for it.       If you&#146re like me you don&#146t get around to your second cup right away and reheating, even in the microwave, isn&#146t a great solution.  I&#146m the only coffee drinker in the house; the 8 cup size works well.  Setting things is simple &#150 the buttons are easy to press, the readout is bright red, and setting up the auto-brew feature is easy and it works.
feature is easy ,buttons are easy to press ,readout is bright red ,
bright red,only coffee,simple things,second cup,easy feature,
We do not drink coffee on a regular basis, but we love inviting people over and making lattes and espressos.  The coffee feature is easy to use.  Although it does brew slowly, it has the best flavor we've ever gotten at home before.  Our old coffee pot left the coffee tasting metallic and burnt.  My fiance has no problem using the espresso side; he can get a better foam than I can.  Cleaning it is easy, except for the little espresso filter.
coffee feature is easy to use ,has the best flavor ,get a better foam ,
easy espresso,best flavor,burnt tasting,easy feature,better foam,
There is a permanent metal filter available as an extra cost option.     What I like most about this machine is the ability to adjust the intensity of the coffee.   If you like strong coffee, this machine comes set for wake-the-dead coffee.  It's not expensive to add it, but it seems like a strange oversight in a machine that is overall well-thought-out.      All-in-all, though, it's a really durable little item.
a permanent metal filter ,not expensive to add ,a really durable little item ,
overall machine,strange oversight,expensive oversight,dead coffee,available filter,
The machine's Filter Basket is removable and comes out of the brewing area for simple cleaning.   I'm not sure about all of the TF5 series makers, but the TF5GTF that I recently purchased, included a reusable Gold Tone Filter.   This was a must feature for me since I did not want to hassle with paper filters. Each side of the water reservoir has very easy to read Water Level Markings which make filling the machine a very simple operation.   The water level is just as easy to see with no guessing what-so-ever.
Filter Basket is removable ,water reservoir has very easy to read ,water level is just as easy ,
easy level,reusable Gold,removable Basket,sure series,easy Water,
Adding water is relatively easy, except that one has to almost completely upturn the carafe to empty it completely.   So, big deal, no.   It also makes cleaning the pot difficult, since no adult hand can fit inside the relatively small opening.   The brewing cycle also seems a good deal longer than that of the Krups unit it replaced.     So, those quibbles aside, I have to say that the Mr.
water is relatively easy ,relatively small opening ,seems a good deal ,
small opening,adult hand,difficult pot,easy water,good deal,
I'm not sure there are many of these machines still out there, since they have been updated since this model came out.  However, I bought mine refurbished for around $1200 a few years ago, and have not had any trouble with it.  This makes very good expresso.  Buy whatever brand beans you like and put them into the bean dispenser on top.  The machine grinds the beans whenever you make a coffee product, so you cup is always fresh brewed.  You can dispense hot water for tea, etc, setting it to the amount you want every time.
makes very good expresso ,cup is always fresh ,dispense hot water for tea ,
hot water,many machines,good expresso,sure machines,Buy brand,
If you are in the rush there is the anti-drip function to sneak a cup while still brewing.      I like the hot red look and design and maybe the best feature for me is the warm up option.  This let's you keep the coffee warm for hours without burning the pot.     I'll be sipping my morning cup again tomorrow from my metallic red pot and I believe it will taste as good as coffee gets.      Now I only need to find a matching hot red new toaster to go with it to make my winter mornings as merry as they can get.
the anti-drip function ,like the hot red look ,find a matching hot red new toaster ,
good coffee,warm coffee,hot look,metallic pot,warm option,
Our family uses this product many times everyday.  The espresso is consistently good and the machine is very reliable.  Just follow the instructions and be sure to run the decalcification cycle when the machine calls for it.  The manual does not tell you that after warmup, you should run the steamer into an empty cup to clear it of water in the lines.  This will avoid adding water to your steamed milk.
espresso is consistently good ,machine is very reliable ,sure to run ,
steamed milk,good machine,reliable machine,everyday times,many times,
The coffee this Mr.  Coffee makes is pretty good tasting, but of course that greatly depends on the quality of coffee you choose to put into it.   Use cheap canned coffee and of course your coffee wo not taste as great as freshly ground gourmet coffee.   No rocket science needed to know that, but I had to add it to my review.   It always bugs me when people use cheap coffee and then blame it's finished quality on the coffee maker.
Mr. Coffee makes is pretty good tasting ,finished quality on the coffee maker ,people use cheap coffee ,
great ground,cheap coffee,cheap Use,finished quality,good tasting,
I do not know if 4-Cup means four measuring cups for four glasses, but I can drink the entire decanter's worth in two mugs.     I, too have a defective clock.  It gained approximately one hour over the period between a Wednesday night and Monday night when I got around to resetting it.  It's a great little coffee maker, except for the issues keeping correct time.
drink the entire decanter ,have a defective clock ,a great little coffee maker ,
worth decanter,correct time,defective clock,entire decanter,great coffee,
This is my second thermal coffee maker.   This model is vastly superior to the Braun 8 cup I owned previously.   The Braun model died after about 40 uses and was just out of warranty.   This model makes outstanding coffee as it is both very hot and requires much less coffee grounds than my previous model.   I love everything about this coffee maker.
model is vastly superior ,model makes outstanding coffee ,requires much less coffee grounds ,
outstanding coffee,second coffee,hot coffee,superior Braun,previous model,
It has  a timer and a clock.   It shuts off in two hours, I would   like it to stay on longer because I do not drink my coffee  quiet that fast.   It is easy to clean and has a removable  filter basket to fill the coffee with grinds of coffee.   The place you put the water in is very wide and easy to  fill.   The hot plate is non-stick which is nice.
has a removable filter basket ,easy to fill ,water in is very wide ,plate is non-stick ,
hot plate,removable filter,non stick,wide water,easy water,
The Capresso MT500 brews through a water filter to enhance flavor and the heating element is non-aluminum.   Brewed coffee finds its way into a sturdy stainless thermal vacuum carafe.   The MT500&#146s carafe keeps coffee sipping hot for almost three hours.   The controls for the MT500 are in an awkward location; however, the controls work great and are sturdier than any other model I have ever owned.
heating element is non-aluminum ,coffee sipping hot ,controls work great ,
sturdy vacuum,awkward location,great controls,hot coffee,sturdier model,
Most of my appliances are royal blue and it would have been nice to have this match. 99, I'll get over this soon.     This coffee maker is easy enough to clean.   All pieces can go in the dish washer and I've never melted anything yet.   [I also make sure to put all plastic items on the top shelf though.
appliances are royal blue ,coffee maker is easy ,make sure to put ,
Most appliances,sure items,nice match,royal appliances,plastic items,
Makes a decent cup of coffee.  The carafe can be difficult to pour from.  Either it comes out unevenly and slowly spills or you have to pour it out at a very slow pace.  Besides that it performs quite well.
Makes a decent cup of coffee ,difficult to pour ,very slow pace ,
difficult carafe,decent cup,slow pace,
  Works as described, takes little room on the counter and the coffees and teas you can buy, rivals whats on the shelf in your supermarket.  Its so easy to use, no mess and you can take it anywhere.   I recently brought it to a birthday party and made guests their preference of coffees and tea selections.   It made a big hit.  I was skeptical about the tea, but it actually came out darker and had more flavor that a brewed cup using a tea bag.
takes little room on the counter ,so easy to use ,skeptical about the tea ,had more flavor ,
more flavor,darker flavor,little room,big hit,skeptical tea,
You now have the option to insert the Kcup flavor of your choice or move on to the next step if you choose to have a cup of tea.  Now you are ready to close the cradle by pressing down  the "Press To Open Tab", which exposes the single cup water reservoir.  You can add water to the fill line or go an extra quarter cup for just a smidge more out of that morning glory.  The flashing blue led prompts you to start the brewing process, which takes all of three minutes. It all seems so perfect, but is it.  Well complaints we had with the premium brewer at the office were that there just was not enough coffee in the cup after the brewing process.
exposes the single cup water reservoir ,ready to close ,go an extra quarter cup ,
extra quarter,enough coffee,blue brewing,next step,ready cradle,
Do not need more bells and whistles.  Simple, Good looking and makes a really good cup of coffee.  Have to pull further out from under cabs to pour water.
not need more bells ,makes a really good cup of coffee ,pull further out from under cabs ,
more bells,good cup,further cabs,Good Simple,
If anything does happen to get past that filter, there is also a piece of mesh right where you drink.  I have used it nearly every day since I got it, and it is great quality.    The mug itself is stainless steel, with the color in a glossy finish on the outside.  I have the original Iris (purple) color, but now there are many more from which to choose.  The stainless steel helps to keep your drink hot for a long time.
get past that filter ,great quality ,stainless steel ,
stainless steel,purple color,more color,glossy finish,many color,
for 10 cups), finer grinds of coffee yield the best flavour.   The carafe is dripless, the "pause and serve" dripless as well.   Also, the carafe handle is a rubbery non-slip material and I have not broken it yet.     Lastly it is great value.   Available everywhere for around $40.
coffee yield the best flavor ,carafe is dripless ,great value ,
best flavor,great value,dripless carafe,dripless pause,
 I would not call it coffee, but something suggestive of coffee.  Given what I know of the Keurig process I ca not imagine how it would ever produce rich coffee.  Now think about the Keurig process, where moderately hot water is mildly forced down the center of a cup of grounds in about 30 seconds total.  There just is not enough time (or heat and pressure) for the water to extract the goods from the grounds.   There is not.
produce rich coffee ,moderately hot water ,not enough time ,
hot water,total seconds,suggestive something,enough time,rich coffee,
Both options are expensive vs.     If you want coffee perked and done when you wake up, you'll want this model because of the timer.   If you have a particular brand and brew you want, this should be OK as you can buy filters and put your own coffee mix in there.     If you're a light sleeper and your kitchen is close to the bedroom, be prepared for the HCKKKHCCHKH that this (and most) coffee makers makes.   If you're a coffee drinker, this is your wake-up call.
options are expensive ,have a particular brand ,kitchen is close ,a light sleeper ,
close kitchen,particular brand,most coffee,own coffee,expensive options,
Maybe it seems like too much work to me; maybe it seems pretentious.   I do not know - I'm just sure I prefer a machine.     I never seriously considered a percolator, though several friends who are  serious  coffee drinkers say they're far superior to the drip machines.   I've never had a problem getting good coffee from a drip maker, and there's a great selection, so I kept to the familiar.     After visiting a couple of stores, I had a pretty good idea what was out there.
too much work ,serious coffee drinkers ,a great selection ,problem getting good ,
good coffee,superior drip,sure machine,several friends,familiar selection,
The cord is long enough to permit placement on a counter in locations other than directly in front of the outlet.     My only complaint is that when pouring the last of the pot, the lid has a tendency to leak around the threads.  Opening and closing is easy as the closed position is marked with an arrow and a simple 180-degree turn does the job.  I do wish that the pot held ten cups rather than 8, but that's a personal preference.      It is important that the carafe be removed immediately when brewing is complete.
pouring the last of the pot ,closing is easy ,a personal preference ,pot held ten cups ,brewing is complete ,important that the carafe ,
other locations,closed position,easy closing,important carafe,ten cups,
The DeLonghi Combo Machine brews a great cup every time.   Sometimes I have been confused on how to use espresso machines, but the DeLonghi is not like that.   It is easy to use and easy to clean.                 I would definitely recommend the DeLonghi Combination Coffee Espresso Machine to anyone.
Machine brews a great cup every time ,easy to clean ,easy to use ,
great cup,
I did not know which machine in the store to get, but the sales clerk helped me make the decision to buy this one.   It is incredibly simple to use and the espresso is great.   The crema is perfect too.   My latte's rival those in coffee houses and I am saving a ton of money.
incredibly simple to use ,espresso is great ,crema is perfect ,
rival latte,perfect crema,great espresso,simple espresso,
I own a  Bialetti Mocha Express and have been extremely pleased with the coffee it produced.  I bought the Pavoni with the hopes of replacing my Mocha Express with a more carefree electric machine. Simply put, the machine produces lousy coffee. All attempts produced a vile cup of coffee.
more carefree electric machine ,machine produces lousy coffee ,attempts produced a vile cup of coffee ,
vile cup,lousy coffee,pleased coffee,carefree machine,electric machine,
Overall you will like this coffee maker if u want a thermal coffee maker that is easy to use, and retro-Euro styled.   The product seems really well made, was easy to set up and a bit larger than most others we are accustomed to.     However we like rather strong roasts such as Expresso and Italian roast.  The machine does not have a feature found on less expensive machines that is used for the times when u want to make 1 to 4 cups.  Therefore, it required nearly double the amount of grounds to get a taste that was to our liking since we typically brew in small amounts.
want a thermal coffee maker ,easy to use ,easy to set ,like rather strong roasts ,less expensive machines ,required nearly double the amount of grounds ,
larger bit,such roasts,u times,easy bit,double amount,
  I find that I am not buying as much coffee so this machine is saving me money.   The fact that there is no carafe to wash or break saves time and effort and the one-cup dispenser allows for a hot cup of coffee each time.     I recommend this machine for any coffee lover who likes a fresh cup of coffee on hand at all times without the bother of brewing new pots.   It is easy to use, easy to clean and puts out a mighty fine eye-opener in the morning.  For more information:  http://www. hamiltonbeach.
not buying as much coffee ,brewing new pots ,mighty fine eye-opener in the morning ,easy to use ,
easy eye,fine eye,new pots,hot cup,more information,
Once you get the desired amount you pour it into the water reservoir, which is directly underneath the coffee tank.     For iced coffee it almost the exact same except I cut the amount of water in half and I put a tray of ice cubes in the coffee tank.  It is also very important to remember to turn the automatic heater  to off or your nice cold coffee will soon become very warm coffee.     The Coffee tank cannot be put in the dishwasher but the filter basket and drip tray can be used in the top shelf.     Overall    Using this coffeemaker has been a breeze.
become very warm coffee ,also very important to remember ,turn the automatic heater ,
Overall coffeemaker,warm coffee,automatic heater,important heater,iced coffee,
With an easy to use interface and  a simple to use one button activation system the tassimo is quick and easy to use. A modern and sleek design will make this product a great addition to any kitchen.   The Disc System- The main advantage of this product is the easy to use tassimo disc system. You simply select your required disc and place it into the disc holder situated on the front of the unit. Once completed you simply remove the used disc and dispose of  with the minimum of cleaning required and you are ready to repeat the process. With new products being added all the time the tassimo is a versatile product that will last for many years to come.
button activation system the tassimo is quick ,easy to use interface ,easy to use ,simple to use ,easy to use tassimo disc system ,time the tassimo is a versatile product ,
easy tassimo,new products,easy interface,ready process,versatile product,
Taste:   One of the best cups of coffee I have had in a long time.  The coffee was the perfect temperature.  The automatic shut off, will shut the idle pot off after two hours, but you can just hit the "On" button to start the warmer plate up again.     Clean Up:   If you have owned one of the multiple piece grind and brew machines you will love the ease of clean up on this one.  Basically, you clean out the removable filter holder.  How cool is that.
coffee was the perfect temperature ,start the warmer plate ,shut the idle pot ,
idle pot,best cups,removable filter,automatic pot,warmer plate,
Our previous B&D SpaceMakers were great, but Model ODC405 is a total failure.   With good eyesight I have difficulty reading the LCD display.       Installation was easier than with previous models, but with only a minimal amount of space saved.      The fact that B&D keeps this inferior product on the market tells me to make my future small appliance purchases from another manufacturer.
B&D SpaceMakers were great ,Model ODC405 is a total failure ,keeps this inferior product on the market ,
small appliance,minimal amount,inferior product,great Model,previous B,
This coffee maker grinds its own beans, has a metal micro filter and can be set on a timer to make coffee whenever it is convenient.  It also takes coffee grounds, if you prefer to by the grounds instead of the beans.   The buttons and functions were relatively easy to figure out.  It is a bit messy to clean up after, with multiple parts to clean, but the quality of the brew is worth it.
functions were relatively easy to figure ,messy to clean ,quality of the brew is worth ,
messy bit,clean parts,own beans,worth brew,easy functions,
This means that at two cups or a little less of espresso the water produced by this machine is at the optimal temperature to brew espresso.  After two cups the water going through your espresso will be too hot and therefore will burn your espresso.  So if you want to make espresso for one latte you can do it well with this machine.  If you want to make more than that you need to brew again.  So if you want an inexpensive espresso machine that produces good quality lattes cappuccinos or just plain espressos this is the machine for you.
little less of espresso the water ,just plain espressos ,produces good quality ,want an inexpensive espresso machine ,
optimal temperature,inexpensive espresso,hot espresso,less espresso,good quality,
You simply add water to the bottom compartment, add the coffee into the filter, and set it on the stovetop to boil.  It's safe for gas, electric, or ceramic stovetops.  Also, do not use abrasive cleaners or steel wool, or you'll scratch the finish.  Make sure to dry it thoroughly before you put it away.  At this price, they make great gifts, but be sure to buy one for yourself, too.
not use abrasive cleaners ,sure to dry ,make great gifts ,sure to buy ,
sure gifts,sure Make,ceramic stovetops,great gifts,bottom compartment,
The insulated carafe keeps your coffee hot and fresh tasting for MORE than 4 hours.  It brews the coffee through the lid directly into the carafe to seal in flavor.  It has the sneak-a-cup feature, easy to read water window and the filter basket and brew-thru lid are dishwasher safe.  You have to wash the thermal carafe by hand and it looks very fragile on the inside.  It brews coffee very quickly and there's a regular or decaf setting on the handle.
has the sneak-a-cup feature ,easy to read water window ,wash the thermal carafe by hand ,
fragile inside,decaf setting,easy feature,fresh tasting,hot coffee,
At just about $100, we expected more.   The pause and serve feature does not work, coffee continues to pour out, and the hotplate has peeled because of it.  The pot fits so tightly under the coffeemaker that it is difficult to snap into place.  The lid to the coffee pot is very hard to take off and put back on.  This would be an extremely hard coffeemaker to use if I were elderly or had arthritis.  Two capable adults could not open the lid to the coffee pot.
difficult to snap ,coffee pot is very hard to take ,an extremely hard coffeemaker ,
hard pot,difficult place,hard coffeemaker,capable adults,elderly arthritis,
After all, it&#146s just a coffee maker &#150 and, often for us, a tea brewer.   Our luck with Kenmore products has been outstanding and we have no reason to suspect any different experience with this product.      If it fails us, I will be certain to update both this review and my 5-star rating of the product if/when it disappoints us.   In the meantime, for the money, you can&#146t top the Kenmore products.
suspect any different experience with this product ,luck with Kenmore products has been outstanding ,certain to update ,
outstanding products,top Kenmore,certain review,different experience,
I just received my  Bunn NHBX-B 10-Cup Coffee Maker and after carefully following directions made my first cup of coffee for my husband.   He said it was the best cup of coffee he had had in a long time.   As long as it keeps up the good work, I will give this coffee maker 5 stars for coffee.   Be sure to read that closing the lid starts the hot water flowing rather than a switch.
the best cup of coffee ,lid starts the hot water ,Be sure to read ,
hot water,best cup,good work,sure lid,long time,
Materials used on the Santos coffeemakers are prone to crazing, staining and breaking.  The top hinge is poorly designed and subject to frequent breakage (I've gone through 3).      The mini is the little brother to the 3000 and 3001 - the only difference is size (3004) is smaller, and the 3000 has a built-in timer.     In the case of coffee preparation, Proctor-Silex in the 40's had a stove-top stainless steel design upon which the bodum unit is based.     Two compartments - one for water and one for dry coffee, are separated by a gasketed funnel assembly.
Santos coffeemakers are prone to crazing ,mini is the little brother ,has a built-in timer ,had a stove-top stainless steel design ,
subject breakage,stove steel,stainless steel,gasketed assembly,only difference,
What I REALLY wanted was a method to remove the variables so I could discover how to make a really good cup of coffee.   You remove the top chamber (and can store it with a neat storage piece stored in the base) and the pitcher is the serving piece for the coffee.     Cleaning - The material the coffee maker is made of is a hard plastic.   It's amazing, but it does not seem to stain, maybe because it's so hard.   All it takes is a swipe with a soapy dishrag and it's sparkling clear again.   The only complaint I could even dream up is that the pitcher has a lip that makes it difficult to empty fully.
make a really good cup of coffee ,remove the top chamber ,a hard plastic ,
difficult lip,soapy dishrag,good cup,empty lip,clear dishrag,
Once that beans and pot are in place, it is a simple 4 button combination to start the coffee brewing.  As one might guess, this process is overcomplicated by a ways and actually required consultation with the owner's manual.  This is certainly the first coffee maker I have ever had which required that little unmanly action.    On this same first using of the machine we also attempted the venerable espresso.  This met with less satisfaction than the coffee.  What we were able to produce was a watery mess without any foam or milk.
required that little unmanly action ,attempted the venerable espresso ,able to produce was ,
able mess,same machine,watery mess,venerable espresso,less satisfaction,
I cannot be happier with this machine.   It works quickly, like a charm.   Coffee is very  hot (would not want it hotter).   I've been wetting the pods beforehand and using the tea button to brew my coffee -- could not be happier with the results.       We bought this machine for an office setting, so that people could choose their own drinks with little to no clean up.   Now I'm wishing I had one at home too.
not be happier with this machine ,Coffee is very hot ,not be happier with the results ,
little drinks,own drinks,hot Coffee,happier results,happier machine,
  It does not have a pot warmer and that is what attracted us but the coffee brewed is not hot.   Each cup has to be reheated in a micowave.   Filling with water is not easy.   It is obvious, the designer never made a pot of coffee but the unit looks good though.   Very disappointed in the new Krups.
coffee brewed is not hot ,water is not easy ,unit looks good ,
new Krups,warmer pot,good unit,hot coffee,easy water,
The manufacturer calls the metal, “milled steel," which seems like a polished stainless steel to me.  Water is heated and starts being pumped to the grinds nearly instantly when you turn this unit on.  It's not unusual for a 10 cup coffeemaker to take twice as long to brew, so this shorter brewing cycle cuts energy consumption in half.   You can even shut it off before the 8 minute auto-off cycle.  Then, there is no need to power a hot plate to keep the coffee hot, the coffee keeps hot in the carafe. The coffee brewed by this unit is great, smooth and not bitter.
Water is heated ,take twice as long to brew ,coffee keeps hot in the carafe ,unit is great ,
hot coffee,hot plate,shorter brewing,long coffeemaker,stainless steel,
Using good beans to start with, and a good grind, I get quite a tasty cup from the machine providing I follow a couple precautions.     The main issue I have with it is that I ca not make a satisfactory strength at maximum brew capacity.   I can fit roughly 6 Tbs into the filter basket without an overflow issue.   If I try more than that, I end up with coffee grounds in the carafe and a poor cup.   My solution is to not make full batches, but rather limit myself to 6 cups of coffee instead of the advertised 10.
Using good beans ,not make a satisfactory strength ,not make full batches ,
poor cup,advertised coffee,tasty cup,more coffee,maximum brew,
The very first pot of coffee leaked all over the countertop as did most subsequent pots.   Not to worry, however, as the pot does not even brew now.   The display window shows an Err2 message preventing the pot from starting.   Some in the household think that is the best thing the coffee maker has done since taking it out of the box.   This pot is going back to the store today.   I really expected so much more from KitchenAid, why do they jeopardize their brand by producing such an inferior product.
did most subsequent pots ,very first pot of coffee ,the best thing the coffee maker ,
Err2 message,inferior product,best thing,subsequent pots,first pot,
Once we received it unpacked it, followed the directions, it was making coffee for us instantaneously.  The only downfall I could think of is it needs enough counter-space.  We have ours caddy-cornered and it fits nicely right under the cabinet, but needs to stick out a little to pour the water in.  So if you are tight on counter-space, I would not recommend it.      We are very pleased with our purchase and seeming it is a recent purchase I am guessing it will outlive our past coffee makers.  I'll have to get back with you all in a few years on this one.
needs enough counter-space ,fits nicely right under the cabinet ,little to pour the water ,tight on counter-space ,
counter space,recent purchase,only downfall,little water,cornered cabinet,
Since 2 hours is the max, when I get coffee, I turn it off and then immediately back on.  That allows for an extension of time to keep that coffee hot and flavorful.     I like the additional filtration that is inside the water well, which is a charcoal filter.  Finding a new one is a real problem.  However, I have found them on the internet.     It also has the optional feature of the gold filter.
a charcoal filter ,like the additional filtration ,a real problem ,
new problem,charcoal filter,additional filtration,real problem,hot coffee,
(Be aware that the "steel" used on the machine is not the best quality stuff by far. )  I would assume the lesser models work pretty much the same.       All-in-all this is a nice coffeemaker that I am really happy with.   Krups makes one good-tasting cup of coffee.
not the best quality stuff ,assume the lesser models ,a nice coffeemaker ,
lesser models,same models,best quality,aware steel,nice coffeemaker,
The cord is just over 2 feet long.     ~ My Experience    Oh, my little Mr.  Coffee is SOO cute.   I found it was extremely easy to set the clock, and program for delay brewing when necessary.   Did not need the instructions - just push a few buttons and I was ready to go.       The carafe has a nicely balanced, easy to hold handle.
ready to go ,push a few buttons ,easy to hold handle ,
few buttons,easy clock,cute SOO,balanced carafe,necessary brewing,
This machine is very simple to use and make the best coffee ever.  I bhough it because I always wanted an automatic machine at home that can be easy to use.  make great coffee and it's easy to clean.  This machine give me everything I want for a good price.
machine is very simple to use ,easy to use ,wanted an automatic machine at home ,easy to clean ,
good price,easy coffee,simple machine,great coffee,automatic machine,
The frothier works real well also and heat the milk up relatively fast.  And I love the adjustable coffee dispenser, It raises and lower to adjust to your cup size.   It is very easy to cleans a matter of fact is self cleans the coffee dispenser after each use.  It also shuts itself off automatically after 3 hrs.  if you leave it on.  I know it's a lot of money but I do think it will pay for itself in the long run.
lower to adjust ,love the adjustable coffee dispenser ,very easy to cleans ,
long run,easy matter,frothier works,lower cup,adjustable coffee,
  When you use less finely ground coffee, the brew is weak even with the Strong setting selected.   Either way, the internal water output bends the filter in half and the grounds spill out.   If you use paper filters alone, they are often bent by the internal water output as it moves into place when you close the top. SLOW SLOW SLOW.   It takes entirely too long to brew coffee - approximately 5-7 minutes for 8 cups on strong setting.   The normal setting is faster (2-3 minutes for 8 cups), but the coffee looks and tastes like dirty water.
brew is weak ,takes entirely too long to brew ,approximately 5-7 minutes ,
internal water,Strong setting,normal setting,dirty water,less ground,
It's light, tough, and cleans up beautifully -- no wiping or rinsing is necessary.  But it makes such good coffee that I started using it at home and soon retired both my drip coffee maker and my stovetop espresso maker.  I've had to leave two behind and buy new ones because people (including my mom) became enamored of mine and would not let me leave with it.  I bring it on road trips so as to avoid the torture of hotel and gas station coffee.  If they provide hot water for tea, the Aeropress is good to go.
buy new ones because people ,Aeropress is good to go ,provide hot water for tea ,
hot water,good coffee,good Aeropress,enamored mine,new ones,
I use filtered water already, so the filtration system was not a draw for me.   It has some descaling notification feature; but I ca not comment on how useful it is as I have not used it.   It seems to make a good cup of coffee as one would expect.   The dripless carafe is not dripless.   The worst feature is the water level indicator.   It is  a tiny tube that is hard to read even when you bend down to get a bird's eye view.
use filtered water ,make a good cup of coffee ,carafe is not dripless ,hard to read ,a tiny tube ,
dripless carafe,worst feature,tiny tube,good cup,filtered water,
My first disappointment came after filling the removable water reservoir.  This takes a moment, during which the valve at the bottom makes just enough contact to spill water all over your countertop.      My next step was to add coffee grounds to the filter basket.  This could be especially hazardous if you set the appliance to brew while unattended.  You will absolutely be able to pour coffee, but only a portion of it will make it into the cup.  The spout on the carafe is not correctly engineered, leading to coffee pouring down the side of the carafe.
filling the removable water reservoir ,valve at the bottom makes just enough ,able to pour ,
hazardous appliance,removable water,unattended appliance,able coffee,next step,
Why did I buy an espresso maker.  My apartment kitchen is so tiny that I do not have the counter space for a traditional coffee maker.  For my taste, I dilute the coffee more than recommended, and it makes a couple of cups of sweet, strong coffee- just enough for one person.  I like that the coffee is boiling hot when it's done, as many drip machines make lukewarm coffee at best.
not have the counter space ,apartment kitchen is so tiny ,coffee is boiling hot ,drip machines make lukewarm coffee ,
sweet cups,many drip,counter space,hot coffee,tiny kitchen,
This eliminates the need to buy anything else but the coffee.  With my previous drip maker, I always ran out of filters at the worst possible time.     Coffee quality is good, comparable to any other drip coffee maker I've experienced.  There's enough room in the filter to hold grinds sufficient to make very strong coffee for me.     It's worth noting that a "4-cup" coffee maker means the little carafe will fill 4 dainty little coffee cups of about 5 oz each.  "Two mug" would be a more realistic serving size based upon the way most people today drink coffee.
Coffee quality is good ,enough room in the filter ,hold grinds sufficient to make ,coffee maker means the little carafe ,
worst time,realistic size,dainty coffee,previous drip,most people,
- The area below the express maker is too high for an express cup and too low for a standard express pot.   Still have not found something that fits properly.  - The steaming element is very short and it is impossible to remove your espresso without hitting this very hot element. - The espresso is never very hot. This is not my first machine and I'm disappointed.
maker is too high ,element is very short ,impossible to remove ,espresso is never very hot ,
short element,impossible espresso,express cup,standard pot,express maker,
Trust me I looked at all of them and this is the best 4 cup coffee maker out there.   It takes up very little space, and is easy to clean.  It brews excellent coffee and pretty quickly too.  I use it everyday and it is very durable.   I would definitely buy it again.
easy to clean ,very little space ,brews excellent coffee ,
best cup,excellent coffee,easy space,little space,
For the genre, it's a good looking and working unit, but does take a little getting used to.  The tabs on the water reservoir work well once you get the hang of them.  Likewise, you have to be sure to close the coffee basket all the way (you'll feel it click) and push the carafe all the way into the machine.  If you do not, it will overflow and make a mess.  (Yes, I learned this the hard way. ) The coffee is plenty hot enough for me and the carafe does a good job of keeping it warm for hours.
sure to close ,carafe does a good job ,coffee is plenty hot enough ,
good job,hot enough,hard way,little unit,warm hours,
This coffee maker has a good design, but the materials seem rather cheap (to go along with the price).  It had a very strong plastic smell when I first opened it.  I ran many cups of hot water through it, then let it sit for several months and the smell seemed to go away.  It has not worked since.
coffee maker has a good design ,had a very strong plastic smell ,ran many cups ,
hot water,good design,several months,many cups,cheap materials,
I like this coffeemaker particularly because you start with unground coffee beans, and the 454 grinds them at the time you make the pot.     The grinder is the unique Capresso true grinder, rather than a blender-type high-speed chopping blade.  This results in a much more consistent grind and does not overheat the coffee as blade-type grinders do, retaining more flavor.     It also comes with a gold-plated metal cone filter that I do not use.  I've never liked metal coffee filters, as they clog up with use, and need to be cleaned after each pot.  Instead, I prefer to use a throwaway paper filter (Melitta size 4), which simplifies and shortens the process considerably.
grinder is the unique Capresso ,retaining more flavor ,much more consistent grind ,
more flavor,blade type,unique Capresso,high speed,unground coffee,
It comes with three grounds holders, 1-cup, 2-cup, and one for the PODS.  As most of the Espresso makers on the market, you ca not use a standard size cup to collect your java, they're way too tall.  The mechanism is simple and you manually control the amount of water dispensed.      Coffee Section: As eluded to by a previous reviewer, the production of coffee is really s-l-o-w.  The design allows you to grab a cup while its still brewing.  In the case of this carafe I ca not seen to be able to pour anything out of it without the liquid pouring all over the place.
not use a standard size cup ,mechanism is simple ,production of coffee is really s-l-o-w ,able to pour ,
liquid place,most Espresso,tall way,previous reviewer,standard size,
The coffee is ready in under five minutes.  The water is easy to pour in at the back.  The filter part of the machine swings out and is easy to fill with coffee grinds.  The mesh filter has a handle on the top, so it is easy to pull out and clean.
coffee is ready ,water is easy to pour ,easy to fill ,easy to pull ,
easy coffee,easy top,clean top,easy water,ready coffee,
It was $25 for a remanufactured model, and looked pretty cool, but I did not *need* it just then, so it sat in the box in storage for a few months.  Then my older HomeCafe gave up the ghost, so this critter came out of storage.     Unlike other pod brewers I've used, the KP1010 uses two side-by-side pod holders with separate spouts coming out into the cup.  You can choose to make one or two cups, each 6. 0 ounces, or one or two "specialty" cups for the larger latte/vanilla/cappucino pods that are increasingly hard to find.  (There is no two-pod holder, and the specialty holder is probably too big for the two-cup pods like the newer cappucino ones.
increasingly hard to find ,specialty holder is probably too big ,no two-pod holder ,
newer cappuci,remanufactured model,older HomeCafe,cool model,big cup,
This is a wonderful coffee maker.  The 580 makes a terrific tasting cup of hot coffee.  Features like an in line filter, and gold tone filter(two filters) makes this coffee maker a class act. The easy to use auto settings were easy to figure out.
a wonderful coffee maker ,makes a terrific tasting cup ,easy to use auto settings ,
gold tone,easy auto,hot coffee,easy settings,terrific tasting,
The 10 cup capacity seemed quite a bit smaller than our 14 cup Cuisinart, but the 14 cup always seemed a bit large.  But here are the real issues that are making me look for a replacement for this less than 6-month old machine.  After the tenth or fifteenth time, cleaning this mess up starts to feel like an exercise in masochism. The carafe: for some odd design quirk, it seems almost impossible to pour liquid from this carafe without getting a dribble outside the pouring lip.  You dribble pouring cold water in the reservoir, and you dribble pouring hot coffee in a cup.
the real issues ,dribble pouring hot coffee in a cup ,dribble pouring cold water in the reservoir ,
cold water,large bit,smaller bit,impossible liquid,old machine,
I am quite surprised by all of the negative reviews about this coffee maker.   I've had mine for 4 1/2 years now and have had no problems with overflows, clogged filters, shattered glass, or lukewarm coffee.   The cap on the carafe is open when brewing (that's how the coffee gets in there) and remains open while sitting under the brewer.  If you leave it there you'll likely have lukewarm coffee within 30 minutes.   So please remove it if you want hot coffee hours after it's initial brewing.
cap on the carafe is open ,initial brewing ,want hot coffee hours ,
lukewarm coffee,open brewer,hot coffee,negative reviews,open brewing,
On work days, we use the more efficient cone-filter coffee pot that has the coffee ready when we get up.  Although the cone-filter coffee is quite good, at its best it does not equal the vacuum coffee.     The Bodum coffee maker has serious design flaws that require careful attention to avoid accidents.  Perhaps the greatest danger results from the handle, which is a somewhat flexible plastic that grips the narrow neck of the lower bowl.
use the more efficient cone-filter coffee pot ,does not equal the vacuum coffee ,cone-filter coffee is quite good ,Bodum coffee maker has serious design flaws ,require careful attention ,a somewhat flexible plastic ,
lower bowl,good coffee,best vacuum,equal vacuum,greatest danger,
It brews great tasting hot coffee, much better than my previous Black and Decker.  The coffee maker's black color and stainless steel styling looks great and the unit is easy to clean and easy to operate.  The water reservoir lid, filter holder, and carafe lid easily detach and can be placed in the dishwasher or dried by hand.  The instructions recommend that the carafe be hand-washed only.
brews great tasting ,unit is easy ,steel styling looks great ,
easy unit,stainless steel,previous Black,hot coffee,great tasting,
I recently went through 4 different coffee makers trying to get a good cup of coffee.   None of the coffee makers were unknowns, and they all had excellent reviews.   This makes the best pot of coffee I have had in some time.   It is my belief that most coffee machines that are listed has having 'smooth coffee' generally mean bland coffee.   Coffee is supposed to be robust and flavorful and have plenty of aroma.   What it is not supposed to be is bitter.
get a good cup of coffee ,had excellent reviews ,makes the best pot of coffee ,
bland coffee,most coffee,smooth coffee,best pot,good cup,
, plenty for even smaller three lattes at once) but runs a bit low on steam for large jobs.   It is an inexpensive unit and has its quirks as a result.   All in all considering the price this thing is excellent.   Throw the plastic tamper away and get (or make from 1 1/2 pvc pipe cap) a proper 58 mm tamper.
runs a bit low on steam ,an inexpensive unit ,price this thing is excellent ,
smaller lattes,large jobs,excellent thing,inexpensive unit,low steam,
It does not include damage to the product resulting from accident, misuse, or repairs by unauthorized personnel.  Black & Decker has a toll- free Consumer Assistance number for questions regarding warranty or service.  However, the feature that sold us on the  Black & Decker VersaBrew Plus  model was the 2-hour automatic shut-off button.  I also like the Sneak-A-Cup interrupt feature when I'm in a hurry or just need a quick caffeine fix.  The programmable feature is easy to use and another of the features that solidified our decision to purchase this model.  The only drawbacks I have found so far are the fact that this model is not easy to clean.
model was the 2-hour automatic shut-off button ,need a quick caffeine fix ,feature is easy to use ,
only drawbacks,automatic hour,easy model,quick caffeine,free Consumer,
When it brews correctly, I do not believe you could find a better cup of coffee.  But, so many times we find ourselves mopping up a leaky mess because it does not drain correctly into the carafe.  We've tried different courseness of grinds, but ca not determine that that's the problem.  It brews quickly and IF it drains properly into the carafe, everything's great.  The carafe maintains the coffee temperature for a decent amount of time & pours easily.  But if half of what you've brewed winds up on the counter, the end does not justify the means.
find a better cup of coffee ,so many times ,'ve tried different courseness ,
great everything,many times,decent amount,different courseness,better cup,
   (There is no warming tray with the stainless carafe.  This has been a great disappointment to both of us.   We have gotten by with it but in all honesty if I ca not have a Bunn I will most likely return to my beloved Proctor Silex.   (The coffee tasted just as good as in the Zijirushi and for less the price. )All in all, it's an okay coffee maker.   Nothing great, nothing horrible.
most likely return ,coffee tasted just as good ,an okay coffee maker ,
great disappointment,horrible nothing,likely return,stainless carafe,great Nothing,
While brewing, the water reaches temperatures of over 200° F.  Once the process is finished the carafe keeps the coffee at a constant temperature of 180° F up to 6 hours.  This makes your afternoon cup just as satisfying as your first cup of the day.        Another unique feature is the gold-mesh cone shaped filter (#4); I simply rinse it with soap and water after each use.        Because of the insulated thermal carafe, do not place it in the dishwasher.  The carafe lid is specially designed to ensure optimal flavor retention.
feature is the gold-mesh cone ,insulated thermal carafe ,ensure optimal flavor retention ,
unique feature,constant temperature,optimal flavor,thermal carafe,first cup,
I like the look of it, it kinda has a retro vintage kitchen look to it.    It's easy to program and easy to use.   I have long loved my KitchenAid appliances and this one is no different.   It is high quality and should provide years of worry free ownership.  The unit measures 14 by 14 by 8-1/2 inches and carries a one-year hassle-free replacement warranty.  It also come in white & black.
easy to use ,high quality ,carries a one-year hassle-free replacement warranty ,
easy program,free replacement,different appliances,free ownership,high quality,
