It got worse until it would not produce a full cup of coffee.  They were very helpful and understanding and replaced the unit without a problem or a hassle with a brand new one.  But, it is pretty disappointing for a $3,000 coffee machine.  I think that is may be because it is a new model and they have not got all the kinks out yet. or I have just had a case of bad luck (twice).
-Bialetti, baby-  I came to know Bialetti thanks to a frying pan and returned for an Espresso machine thanks to history.     My version is a 6-cup, black-handled beauty, measuring about 8" tall.   The handle does not conduct heat and provides a good grip for serving.   The 6-cup capacity was perfect for espresso and groups.
This machine as good at first, but after a few months, lots of problems. The electronics keep malfunctioning.   I have the machine set to brew at 6am, and several times a month, the machine turns on in the early evening and then the brew is cold by morning. If you ever spill any water or coffee on the electronic buttons, you might as well just trash the unit and buy something else.   This machine is not made for frequent use.
much better than at Starbuck's and any of the local coffee houses.  The Z5 has a timer that can be set to turn the machine on and off when you want it to.   The unit is whisper silent even when grinding beans.   It is a well built piece of equipment that is UL approved for both residential and commercial use.
It has auto shut off, which is a nice feature for busy people.   Because of the carafe, you can keep your coffee hot long after it auto shuts off.     I've owned mine now for over 6 months, and the most disappointing thing is that it is very difficult to figure out the programing.   I've used it about 8 times and every time need to reset anything, or use the auto programming,  I have to refer to the manual.   Also, you have to remember to turn the auto programming off when you've finished.   Setting anything on the machine, including the time, turning off the loud, high-pitched "coffee is done" alarm.
4) No bypass door to put in preground coffee (ie decaf)  5) Power switch is on BACK of machine, and no automatic power off feature.   6) Coffee/espresso shots are not hot enough.   7) The coffee "dregs" are more like a sludge.   Other machines make a nice relatively solid "puck" that is much easier to clean out.   8) Steam wand is too short to accomodate reasonable size steam pitcher, and is very difficult to rotate to get the pitcher in and out.   9) Water tank too small.
not produce a full cup of coffee ,a new model ,provides a good grip ,capacity was perfect for espresso ,brew is cold by morning ,much better than at Starbuck ,unit is whisper silent ,a nice feature ,Coffee\/espresso shots are not hot ,Steam wand is too short to accomodate ,very difficult to rotate ,
tall beauty,short wand,nice feature,black beauty,Other machines,bad luck,small tank,hot shots,pitched coffee,preground coffee,
The steamer.  Man, can this thing put out some steam.  Ever try and steam/froth milk with a lousy unit and run out of steam or have not enough pressure.  Well, this Krups for the money is damn good at steaming/foaming milk.
My primary complaint is that the location of the power buttons (in front on the bottom) makes it too easy to set them off unintentionally.  On more than one occasion, moving an item on a crowded countertop has turned on the machine.  Its easy enough to remedy this by leaving the machine unplugged when not in use -- but I hope future models revise this feature.  In a year of use, it has more than paid for itself and provided us with consistently satisfying results.
I've had my Il Caffe Duomo for less than a month and I've already broken two major pieces of the machine.  This is a piece of junk, made cheap in China of lousy material.  What a disappointment.      First, the handle to the espresso grounds cup broke off.
I love the really thick froth and so I just fill my cup with cold milk only to the half way point.  There is a marking on the glass thermos that shows the steam line when the espresso gets to there, start frothing your milk.      The coffee pot needs the pointed coffee filter.  Plus with kids in my house they use the counter and for safety this is just what I do.      I absolutely love the machine.  I ran to the nearest Goodwill and found a replacement machine (any Krups will do) and for a 3.
I purchase my Torani syrup and espresso beans at Cost Plus, they are very inexpensive there.   Be sure to let out some steam at the end to clean the frothing nozzle and wipe it immediately, otherwise it will clog up.     I have broken the espresso carafe twice.   The first time I replaced it, but now I just use an 8oz glass measuring cup, because the carafes are just too delicate and hard to locate.
I love the one I had so much that I bought the 110 version without hesitation.  I use the coffee maker once in a while - perhaps twice a month.   But I use the espresso maker 3-5 times a week and it never fails.   All the parts are the original, the glass coffee beaker, milk beaker, frothing arm (even the rubble nib and metal tube are the original parts).
have not enough pressure ,Krups for the money is damn good ,too easy to set ,hope future models ,consistently satisfying results ,made cheap in China ,hard to locate ,carafes are just too delicate ,use an 8oz glass ,metal tube are the original parts ,
hard carafes,cheap China,easy machine,easy bottom,8oz glass,cold milk,pointed coffee,future models,unplugged machine,first time,
It comes with a permanent filter and if you buy one of these new, you'll pay about $20 for it. How it WorksIt could not be more simple.  Take a coffee mug and check to make sure that it fits in the machine (taller mugs do not).  Then, fill that mug with water and poor the water into the reservoir of the coffee maker.
If the basket were a little deeper you could add more coffee to get stronger coffee without making a mess.     This brings me to mention why I've gone through two of these cup-at-a-time things.   They broke while trying to clean them.   You see, eventually the water chamber and the coffee trickler will get completely disgusting if you make your coffee strong like I do.   Coffee grounds will magically migrate from the basket into the water chamber inside the unit, which becomes unsanitary after a while.
It includes a permanent filter, so there are no hassles with purchasing, using, discarding paper filters.   There is a single large thumb switch to start the brewing cycle and adjacent brewing indicator light - simple and efficient.   Overall I think the Black & Decker DM7 Cup-at-a-Time coffeemaker is a great, inexpensive way to brew single cups of coffee, and highly recommend it.
This coffee maker has a good design, but the materials seem rather cheap (to go along with the price).  It had a very strong plastic smell when I first opened it.  I ran many cups of hot water through it, then let it sit for several months and the smell seemed to go away.  It has not worked since.
I picked this little brewer up on sale for $10 from Canadian Tire.     The problem is - the permanent filter is easy to clean, but the rest of the machine is not.   The freshwater side is a curved portion tapering to a thin end.  (think of one half of the yin/yang symbol)  So again, it's impossible to clean.
With the cup-at-a-time, I'm not wasting coffee.   I get my one cup, no more, no less.     Why buy this.   Well, I say only do so if you can get it cheap.   Mine was $10 Canadian, so about $6. 50 or $7 US.
includes a permanent filter ,brew single cups of coffee ,coffee maker has a good design ,had a very strong plastic smell ,ran many cups ,filter is easy to clean ,side is a curved portion ,impossible to clean ,
permanent filter,inexpensive way,simple indicator,efficient indicator,single thumb,impossible symbol,several months,many cups,easy filter,Canadian Mine,
When it comes to coffee, the important thing (to me) is the temperature; if it's luke-warm, it does not matter how great the beans are.  This coffee machine makes good tasting coffee, but it's not hot.  I have pre-heated the caraffe with boiling water, and it's still not hot enough.  The first cup is fairly hot, after that, you have to nuke it.  I would return this coffee maker if I could find the receipt.
Had a Braun for 12 years,loved it. This Braun Impression is not half the coffee maker my old one was.  The coffee is not even close to being hot enough.  You can only make 9 cups or it overflows.  Biggest oversight in this coffee maker was the absence of the timer.  Wish I could return it.
It's not that big a deal because it does brew it fast.     I would, on occasion, use my previous coffeemaker's programmable feature.   Unfortunately, this Braun does not have it.   It is a feature I do miss.     The unit has a water filter which is a nice feature.
We used to make coffee and put it into a thermos carafe so that it would stay hot without getting that "old coffee taste".   Now we just make a pot in the morning and it stays hot for 4 to 5 hours.   This was a great choice for us.   The water filter is unnecessary for us, as we always use filtered water for our coffee, but we just leave the filter out.
This Braun does a good job of making coffee, but do not bother with the enclosed mesh filter, use paper filters.   The compact size is understated on a kitchen counter, which is nice.   Those complaints about being a 9-cup coffee maker are true--it's the only drawback.   Filter basket pops open easily.
The coffee is hot when made and the carafe keeps it hot for a couple of hours.   I even tried putting hot water in the carafe before letting the hot coffee go into it.  Helped somewhat.   Do not know that any other pot does a better job.   For us, with multiple discounts we ended up paying $39. 00 which was well worth it.
coffee machine makes good tasting coffee ,cup is fairly hot ,a nice feature ,a great choice ,water filter is unnecessary ,use filtered water ,Braun does a good job ,complaints about being a 9-cup coffee maker ,Filter basket pops open ,coffee is hot ,letting the hot coffee ,putting hot water in the carafe ,
hot coffee,hot water,great choice,nice feature,first cup,good tasting,compact size,old coffee,previous coffeemaker,Biggest oversight,
I saw this bizarre coffee maker and was so curious I ordered one.   It takes a few experimental pots to get the perfect flavor that is right for you.   You should also invest in a burr grinder.   I have found that 1oz.  of quality beans, freshly ground and a full pot of water will give excellent results.   I stir the grounds while it is brewing sometimes for even more flavor.
And you have to replace the nylon filter at $5 a pop every few months; I used a permanent gold filter in the Kitchenaid and never had to replace it.     The Santos is also harder to clean than a drip coffee maker.   The grounds do not knock out easily into the trash; you have to scoop them out with a plastic spatula.   And if you enjoy the feeling of wet grounds all over the back of your hand, you'll love pulling out the nylon filter.     On the positive side, however, if you want entertainment from your appliances, the Santos is fun to watch in action.
You do not have to be a coffee geek to appreciate the difference, but you will have trouble enjoying an auto-drip brewed coffee ever again.   The Bodum is a wonderful gadget, and my wife and I would not go back to our Bunn maker ever again.     Improvements to the machine.   The design is really cool, and I like the physical look of the Bodum very much.   If the plastic was a bit thicker, perhaps just 1/8" more, it would help the machine feel sturdier.
This coffee maker also brews fast.  Faster than my drips did.      My only problem with this coffee maker, is you will get sediment.   The filter does not do a good job, so I use paper disc for coffee pots you can buy in the supermarket.  I just cut a + in them, place one over the filter, add my coffee, and brew.  It take the sediment away.
I took it to their store, and it worked perfectly, took it home and it acted up again.   When I went back to the store, it worked again, but they replaced it anyway, as they believed me.   All this without receipt or packaging.   Too kind, and the new one has been flawless.
A few months later the heating element quit, so it no longer worked at all except as a clock. "    As it turns out, I should have found a box, packaged it up and sent it back right then.      Well, fair enough, I guess. " That's ambiguous enough that either my definition (it failed within the two-year period, so is eligible for replacement) or theirs (Whoops. ) could be argued to be the valid one.      Ultimately, however, it's their customer service department's choice, and they chose not to replace mine.
saw this bizarre coffee maker ,takes a few experimental pots ,get the perfect flavor ,even more flavor ,Santos is also harder to clean ,Bodum is a wonderful gadget ,design is really cool ,like the physical look of the Bodum ,machine feel sturdier ,eligible for replacement ,
few months,more flavor,curious maker,only problem,ambiguous definition,excellent results,positive side,wet grounds,thicker bit,more machine,
I do not need it, but I use it during the brewing process to cut down some of the noise of the water dripping into the cup.  You can use a different cup than the one the unit comes with if you choose.     The unit has a permanent mesh filter, eliminating the need for paper filters.      There is an auto shut-off, which is nice - never any burned coffee or cup - but there is also no warmer.  You have to drink the coffee right away for it to be hot, or it will go cold before you know it.  The brewing process is also a little loud.
If you use more than 1 ½ teaspoons of coffee it overflows  4. t use coffee filters because cup is an odd size      Overall despite it. s minor drawbacks I would recommend this to anyone looking for a quick cup of coffee to take to work in the morning.
I decided to buy the Brew &#145N Go after reading the reviews on Epinions and found one at a local store that came with a bonus mug.        When I got it home, my first test was brewing several cups right after the other with plain water.  It worked great.   I found that no cool-down time is necessary between brewing cycles, so we could both enjoy hot, fresh coffee at about the same time.   The second and third cups were just as hot as the first.   The unit was now clean and ready for the coffee test.
You may not be so lucky but it works for me.  The water's also hot enough for tea or hot chocolate and I'm guessing probably even some Ramen noodles (will try that someday).     Only minor annoyance is the lid of the mug which is a little hard to remove.  Do not do it if you've got a full mug of hot coffee.  It's a minor issue though cos you can use some other mug instead of the one supplied.
Here are the downsides:    1) Taste.   The taste is certainly "acceptable" given the price but seems to have a noticeable metallic/plastic overtone.   I've tried to tinker with the brewing formula by using filtered water instead of tap, using a paper-cone coffee filter (not included; use No.  1 or cut down some No.  2's), and adjusting the amount and type of ground coffee.
The thermal mug keeps your coffee nice and sipping hot for about 20 minutes.     I also use my coffee maker to make tea or hot water for some cocoa.       Clean up is so EASY compared to a regular coffee maker.   Just wash your thermal mug, empty out the filter, and the dripper, and wash those too.       I should add however that the water fill line is very hard to see especially in the morning when you're eyes are still 98% shut closed.
use a different cup ,unit has a permanent mesh filter ,filters because cup is an odd size ,test was brewing several cups ,time is necessary between brewing cycles ,unit was now clean ,little hard to remove ,'ve got a full mug ,use some other mug ,using a paper-cone coffee filter ,brewing formula by using filtered water ,water fill line is very hard ,
hot coffee,nice coffee,thermal mug,other mug,acceptable price,first cups,ready coffee,minor annoyance,plain water,Overall size,
The lid also accumulates moisture on the underside which will dribble down the back of the unit.   If you raise the lid slowly this will eliminate the problem.    Lastly, using the supplied measuring spoon, I have found that 3 slightly rounded scoops make a good pot of coffee.   If you need it stronger add an additional scoop.
What do I hate.  You ca not tell from the opaque carafe how much coffee has been brewed.  You can look between the cone nozzle and the carafe to tell if coffee is still running into the carafe, but that's not ideal.  Also, the stainless steel carafe, as other reviewers have noted, gets extremely hot.
Unit is compact, but real strong heater.   Takes a little longer but it sounds like a cappacino maker pushing the water against the coffee.  We went through Mr coffee many years ago and recently were using simple manual pour through method for one cup.  I kept making 4 cups, spilling it over counter and stored it in refrig.
Without this machine, I do not know how I would start my day.  The color on the coffee maker is a nice traditional maker color.  It matches my kitchen, in a way camouflages within the counter tops.  From the previous coffee makers I purchased, I think this one is the best.
I bought this coffee maker after getting fed up with a cheap Mr.  Coffee 4-cup that took forever to make a weak cup of lukewarm coffee.  I could not be more pleased with this machine; it makes a great cup of coffee.  The steel pot is also a nice touch for someone who has broken more than his fair share of the glass variety.  The only drawback of the steel pot is that it is not as easy to see how much water you have in the pot as in a glass one.
Amount    You get 4, 6-ounce cups of coffee when you fully fill the DCC-450.   That&#146s enough for about 2 standard coffee mugs or one travel mug with a bit left over.     You can brew less than the 4 cups if you&#146d like, but I haven&#146t done that.   I find that the 4 cups is a good amount for either the travel mug or for my morning coffee on weekends.   I usually only have a little bit left in the pot and I&#146d rather brew it all at once than have to go back and brew more.   Plus with the thermal pot, you can let the coffee sit for a while and it will stay quite warm.
scoops make a good pot of coffee ,add an additional scoop ,Unit is compact ,make a weak cup ,makes a great cup of coffee ,not be more pleased with this machine ,cups is a good amount ,have a little bit ,
compact Unit,pleased machine,much water,nice touch,fair share,stronger scoop,other reviewers,nice maker,manual method,more pot,
Buttons on base began to crack after 4 months.   A couple of months out of warranty, it began to short-cycle the percolate cycle and the coffee was luke-warm.   Called company to see if we could get it fixed and were told that we were out of luck.   This could have been a great product if Faberware had made some minor changes in the construction and some major changes in ATTITUDE .
The taste of the coffee is much better than any of the drip coffee makers that I have tried.  It also takes up less space on the counter top and is easy to keep clean and new looking.  The stainless steel matches any decor and the sound of the coffee perking brings back memories from my childhood.  This is not only attractive, but fully functional and affordable.  I am planning to buy one for my son and future daughter in law as a gift for their upcoming wedding shower.  There is no comparison for me with other coffee makers.
When the 30 year old percolator that my wife & I inherited from my parents died, my wife & I decided to buy a percolator with a timer.  Unfortunately, the only one available was this Farberware model.  In its short life-span (2 years. ), it made good coffee, however it was not worth the money.
I do find however, a little fine sediment on the bottom of the pot when cleaning.   I do not use filters.    Coffee perks at 1 cup per minute.    Coffee tastes great if you're making 12 cups or just 2.   No problem with timer when used.     Coffee maker needs an "ON" indicator light.
Being known for breaking coffee pots I figured this would be best because there was no glass. I purchased it, took it home, read the directions, cleaned it and made my first brew of coffee.  The coffee was rather good, until I got a mouthful of coffee grounds.  Was not about to go out and start buying perculated coffee, as another mentioned option, in the instruction manual.
The farberware unit also had that clear top handle which lets you see the coffee perking as it brews.  Well I decided to buy and so began my quest.  After work I stopped by Target, Linens & Things, Bed Bath & Beyond, Burdines, Dillards and finally WalMart on the first night.  Not one store carried the FCP512S.  The second night I stopped at BrandsMart and a super size Linens & Things store, no luck.
coffee was luke-warm ,short-cycle the percolate cycle ,have been a great product ,made some minor changes in the construction ,taste of the coffee is much better ,made good coffee ,not worth the money ,Coffee tastes great ,got a mouthful of coffee grounds ,start buying perculated coffee ,
good coffee,future daughter,first brew,clean top,short cycle,worth money,perculated coffee,mouthful coffee,clear unit,upcoming wedding,
After my BrewStation 47424 blew up the day before the warranty was up, they replaced it with the 47454.     I love the BrewStation with no glass carafes to break or be washed.   My biggest beef with the other 2 models over 4 years I've had them, was the hard to read clock which has almost impossible to read AM/PM.   Now the 47454 has a large blue background black print clock that even my African Grey Congo parrot could program.  It is a sleek shaped unit that is very eye appealing.
You could hardly read any of the labeling, and it often acted up from too many coffee overflows into the circuitry.     Often she only wanted to make one or two cups to get going in the morning.  The problem with regular coffee makers is that the first few cups in the pot are extremely strong.  Therefore, you must brew a full pot for optimal flavor, resulting in wasted coffee.  Last Christmas, my wife's mother sought to solve the problem by giving her a Melitta two cup coffee maker with travel mugs.
The Coffee tank cannot be put in the dishwasher but the filter basket and drip tray can be used in the top shelf.     Overall    Using this coffeemaker has been a breeze.  I have not heard my mom complain about it at all.  She really likes the idea of one cup at a time and I like the ice coffee feature.  I do not think I have seen any other coffee maker with it.
So, if you get a cup as soon as it is brewed, it is just very warm.  My other complaint is that it doesn&#146t have a great flavor, perhaps because it isn&#146t really hot until the warmer heats the coffee.    I came to Epinions. com today to look for another brewstation.   Although it has a nice display, it is not a great deal for the price.
It does have a warmer, but this does not seem to affect the flavor of the coffee.     Unfortunately, with the exception of the two-part metal warming plate, it is almost entirely made of plastic.   We developed an issue: brewed coffee leaks into the water tank.   With a quick rinse, this is minor.   Otherwise, it performed well for over a year.
One of the pluses of my new Hamilton Beach Brew Station is that my wife cannot smell the coffee brewing.   I do not have to brew my coffee in the garage anymore.   I do not have to drink instant coffee either.   My favorite feature of the brew station is that no matter when you poor the next cup of coffee it will not taste burnt.
hard to read clock ,has a large blue background ,cups in the pot are extremely strong ,brew a full pot ,have seen any other coffee maker ,have a great flavor ,has a nice display ,drink instant coffee ,
favorite feature,warm cup,next cup,first cups,African Grey,impossible AM,biggest beef,poor cup,instant coffee,other coffee,
I called the company and they want a receipt.  Like I have one after 6 months.  I offered to mail pot but no way.  This is the last Black and Decker named product I will buy.  They sold their name to another company and this company's products are very poor.  This is the second B&D coffee maker I bought in a year.
Before that point, though, the headset was very reliable about being recognized in the same systems.     Still, my end of the headset, i.  hearing the person on the other end, is extremely high quality.  I might start getting some distortion, but only if I've wandered 2-3 rooms over from my phone or left it in the car and walked across a parking lot.  The fit in ear is very snug.
Sometimes I can act like a clown if I have too much coffee, I suppose.  But after a while I came to believe it was, ". grounds in my coffee. " Now that wording makes perfect sense on every level. Well this morning my wife corrects me on this.  She says the verse is, ".
I consider this a strange engineering flaw in an otherwise well-designed device.     However, there is one major flaw with his headset: the microphone.  The output signal seems very weak, and there is no way to increase the microphone's gain.   People on the other end constantly ask if I'm talking to them on a speakerphone, etc. ; they ca not hear me.   The only people who can are those with phones that allow them to really crank up the volume on their end.
***IT POURS*** down the side of the pot as your trying to pour a cup of coffee.  There was more coffee on the counter than in the cup.  Also says it makes a wonderful cup of coffee with no bitter taste.   I did like the size of the pot overall, it is not a big or bulky as some of the new pots on the market and had a 12 cup pot.  I purchased the white which was nice and looked like it would be easy to clean.  Did not like the water system for getting the water on the grounds.
Whoever designed this coffeemaker drinks coffee at Starbucks.   This is not a consumer friendly unit.  It is virtually impossible to pour  water or coffee out of this coffee urn without spilling.  Slow or fast  or even half-fast.  Right handed or left handed.   In it's favor is an automatic shutoff in case you leave it on but  its too soon to have a second cup of coffee.
the last Black ,the second B&D coffee maker ,headset was very reliable ,extremely high quality ,fit in ear is very snug ,otherwise well-designed device ,easy to clean ,have a second cup of coffee ,favor is an automatic shutoff in case ,
other end,snug ear,only people,major flaw,second cup,big pot,second B,new pots,last Black,clown coffee,
A YEAR LATER - after having gone through 4 defective Cuisinarts - The Capresso Coffee Team S WholeLatteLove - 199.   Viva Capresso.  Their machine has turned out to be reliable, to make great coffee, to be very easy to clean, and to be almost inoffensive in its loudness.  I will write more soon, giving details, but we could not be more pleased.
Bottom line: despite several calls and emails to customer service we could not get a decent cup of coffee out.  We received this as a wedding gift and were very excited about the cool programable features.  Unfortunately we found now way to get it to brew a decent dark cup of coffee, our $20 standard drip maker made far better coffee.  Unfortunately the grind and brew settings are not variable enough to brew anything more than a medium brew.  On a machine this expensive there have to be better features for getting the type of brew you want.  Programing works well but is kind of pointless when you ca not get out a good cup of Joe.
We had high hopes for this product but every time we brewed a pot of coffee, the coffee came out cold.   By the time you pour a cup of coffee, it is cold.   This is the worst product and highest priced coffee maker I have ever seen.   What a disappointment.
I noticed last night when filling the water tank that there is a MAX fill line and a stair-step level indicator in the filter body.   I had not noticed it previously because I usually do not have the overhead lights on, just the under-cabinet lights.   My unit is black so it is rather difficult to see inside the reservoir without overhead lighting.   There is no mention of this feature in the manual (that I could find).
I took this one back thinking it was a lemon and the next one did the same thing.  We set it to 6 cups and out came 1/2 teaspoon of grounds.  I am very disappointed.  I want my Capresso back but I ca not get the new ones to work.  I use Starbucks plain coffee beans.
You get so spoiled with something this good.   It's never broken, jammed, leaked, or been any trouble.   It's easy to clean.  It comes with a video that shows you how to use it.
very easy to clean ,not get a decent cup of coffee ,brew a decent dark cup of coffee ,brew settings are not variable ,better features ,had high hopes for this product ,the worst product ,not have the overhead lights ,unit is black ,easy to clean ,
decent cup,overhead lights,cold coffee,good cup,last night,new ones,next lemon,high hopes,same thing,more anything,
Cleaning is an annoyance.  If you don&#146t clean it after 3 pots then you start losing beans in the sludge of the grinder.  If you want to make 3 cups of coffee it can be a little challenging at first.  The "3" line on the carafe is missing.
  At that time, I had a simple $25 Mr Coffee coffee maker, with a $10 coffee grinder, and enjoyed fresh ground coffee the easy way.   But when Cuisinart came out with this new contraption, my wife, being the gadget person in the family, had to have it.   I argued with her - why do we need to spend $179 on a coffee maker, when my simple coffee maker and grinder already brew a great cup of coffee.   "Because it looks cool and I want it" was the answer, so that was one of my Christmas presents that year.
The only con--and it is a major con--are the parts required to clean the coffee maker.  I tried to get used to cleaning the parts but to no avail.     Even if you do not use the autogrind feature (say you want to simply brew pre-ground coffee), the grinder chamber gets wet.  You have to take it apart and dry it off.  I've had the unit for about 6 months now.  The grinder chamber is absolutely a pain in the neck.
Attractive exterior is stainless but shows fingerprints easily.  Coffee only stays lukewarm after brewing.  Very difficult to read water gauge which is located inside the pot.  Purchased this at Williams Sonoma and it is going back to them today.  I expected more from Cuisinart at $149 a pop.
Second, if you happen to start brewing and then open up the lid (perhaps to add more water. ) to the water reservoir, the machine will beep at you and stop brewing.   And that's it.   Now you have to start all over with fresh grounds, more water, etc.
This is another poorly designed area.   The filter basket and cover are easy enough to clean.   However, there is a "ledge" where the whole thing slides into that gets grinds forever sticking to it.   Being a very tight, small space, it was difficult to clean.
enjoyed fresh ground coffee ,brew a great cup of coffee ,brew pre-ground coffee ,grinder chamber gets wet ,Very difficult to read water gauge ,add more water ,cover are easy ,difficult to clean ,
more water,fresh ground,difficult water,wet chamber,stainless exterior,146t pots,small space,new contraption,tight space,whole thing,
Jura/Capresso customer service offered to repair the old one or replace it with this one at a discounted price.   I chose to go ahead with the E8.     I generally drink simple espresso.   I have done some fancy coffee drinks, but those really are not my thing.     Now that I have the E8 dialed in to my preferences, nothing could be more simple.   I have a great cup of espresso available at the touch of a button.
I have exchanged it with the Saeco V'spresso.  1st in Coffee is the best company to deal with.   They checked the temperature setting of the Saeco for me to confirm that it will brew 10 degrees higher than the Jura.  The Jura was sent back today and the company sent out the Saeco so we wo not be without a good coffeemaker for long.
I purchased the e8 a couple of months ago from Williams-Sonoma.   The intention was to be able to reproduce the drinks we can get in our favorite cafes especially now that we've moved away from the city.       When we first got it home and tried it we liked the decent espresso the machine made.   As long as you have the machine set at 1.
The older it got the more the quality of the coffee taste degraded.  I'm in my fourth month and the taste is as good as the first week.  My biggest concern is how long the unit will last.      While the machine looks nice, other reviewers have commented on the plastic materials.
It's essentially a black-box that offers very little control, and none at all that will produce superior coffee.      All semi-autos have self-pressurizing brew stages.  There is no tamping of the grounds which greatly simplifies the process, but produces watery java.      If you're goal is flavor in a cup of coffee or espresso then look elsewhere.
Now over a year later I am so ready to ditch this machine for one that makes a strong cup of coffee.   The black coffee comes out for only one second, the other 7 oz.  is light brown water, which the rep says is the "la crema".   Well I like La Crema, but only as a topper not as the main product in my cup.   No way to make Exresso.   You would think for $1,000 you would be able to make a cup of expresso.
drink simple espresso ,have done some fancy coffee drinks ,have a great cup of espresso ,liked the decent espresso the machine ,taste is as good ,machine looks nice ,produce superior coffee ,offers very little control ,semi-autos have self-pressurizing brew stages ,produces watery java ,makes a strong cup of coffee ,
fourth month,main product,fancy coffee,little control,second oz,strong cup,older quality,other reviewers,biggest concern,degraded taste,
I am a coffee freak.  A cup (or pot) of coffee in the morning is a must have.  I love to sip on my mug of coffee, while watching the morning news.  When the news is over, my coffee is usually gone, and I'm full of energy to start my day.
They should stick to making tools and leave the coffee makers to someone else.   My first experience with the maker was very disturbing.   Unless the carafe is exactly in the right place, the filter basket over flows and you have a coffee mess all over the kitchen counter.   Many, many pots of coffee have been wasted due to over flowing baskets.   I resorted to placing a heavy object against the carafe handle to keep it in place.
I purchased this coffee maker since it looked nice and it had the brew later function.   Setting up the coffee maker was a breeze.  I did not even have to read the instructions  everything was laid out simply enough to be able to figure out the functions of each button.  Brewing my first pot of coffee was pretty simple.
Bought this coffee maker for an exorbitant price about a month ago.   Bought it specifically for the timer feature.   Christmas Eve, it just stopped working.  Calls to the store (Canadian Tire) advised us we needed to prove we bought it there-of course I ca not find the receipt, only the manual for it.  Canadian Tire wo not take it back, calls to Black and Decker go unreturned.
  As I said, this would happen rarely, but when it did it it was troublesome.   We tried a second sample of the same model - with the same strange results. Lacking that one fault, the DCM 2500 is the best coffeemaker we have ever owned.   It brews great tasting coffee quickly, is easy to use, is low cost and has great features.
The carafe has a piece of plastic that the lid is mounted to, that somehow captures coffee underneath it.  Even after washing the carafe, old coffee still drips out from under it.  There is also a metal band around the carafe base that mysteriously catches coffee in the same way.  The maker is so bad, that it's kind of a final joke that pouring coffee out of the carafe is like using a dribble glass.  No matter how carefully you pour, coffee still drips on the counter.
pots of coffee have been wasted due ,placing a heavy object against the carafe ,pot of coffee was pretty simple ,Decker go unreturned ,tried a second sample ,has great features ,brews great tasting coffee ,low cost ,easy to use ,maker is so bad ,
Many pots,Canadian Tire,exorbitant price,best coffeemaker,bad maker,able functions,strange results,nice maker,great features,first experience,
It is dishwasher save and can brew 8 cups in 7 minutes.   Read my complete review at http://thekf580. com/braun-kf580.
I spent more this time and wanted a smaller size coffee maker.   I do not have a lot of counter space in my kitchen and this fills the bill.     The coffee is always hot enough and tastes great.    Makes so fast, you hardly need to program it the night before.
Recently, I've noticed a burned-plastic type of smell in my apartment.   I thought it was from something outside, but after a day.  the smell was still there.   My girlfriend and I could not figure out what it was since there were no burn marks that we could see.
This week it died for good.  It has a year warranty, if I can only find that dated receipt.     It cleans up pretty easy.  My wife likes the built in filter.  The power cord tucks into the housing so you do not have it dragging all over.
I had received the old Krups as a gift, so I did not know how much difference the type of coffee maker could make to the coffee taste.  I shopped around online and found this Braun and bought it because of the brand name, good reviews, and relatively low price.  (If you shop around you can find good deals--mine was only $42. 00 through an Amazon merchant. ) My coffee finally tastes like coffee again.
Do the appliance people realize that.     I've had this item for almost a year now.    I got it at Linens and More, was 70d with a 20% off coupon, leaving you with a 56d price.     I spent more this time and wanted a smaller size coffee maker.   I do not have a lot of counter space in my kitchen and this fills the bill.     The coffee is always hot enough and tastes great.
wanted a smaller size coffee maker ,coffee is always hot ,noticed a burned-plastic type of smell ,find that dated receipt ,had received the old Krups ,relatively low price ,find good deals ,wanted a smaller size coffee maker ,coffee is always hot ,
counter space,great coffee,hot coffee,smaller size,old Krups,good reviews,56d price,outside something,burned plastic,good deals,
I bought a new Bunn after our last one finally died.  I could not tell you how old it was but it lasted forever.  This one has not made it a year.  It leaks water everywhere from the bottom.   There's complaints about this issue all over the internet, Bunn wo not recall so Buyer Beware.
It is simple to clean and maintain.  It has two on/off switches - one for the coffee maker and another for the carafe warming plate.  I ca not think of a need for a timer since it brews in three minutes.
- Open the lid on the top of the brewer, fill plastic measuring container with cold water again, pour water into brewer.  Position decanter on base and close the lid.   - After all of this you simply plug in the coffee maker and turn on the switch.  In around 15 minutes it is ready for coffee brewing.  My husband phoned Bunn and told him of the two problems.
No more un-cleanable clogged water lines in the unit.  I have had my Bunn one for about 5 years and it's still working just great.  This is the best coffee maker I have ever owned.  It also does not "warm" the coffee sitting in the pot to the point where it tastes old in about five minutes, like some do.
If you do not use this at least every third day, the water in it's tank evaporates and has to be replaced.  This is why in the CONS, I wrote "not designed for weekend users".     On the plus side, it does make a good cup of coffee.  I buy high quality, fresh coffee beans and grind them when I brew.  Having good coffee at home is important to me and this product steps up to the plate nicely.
I do not recommend  BUNN    ALSO.  when are we as americans going to rise up and demand that this country not be flooded by inferior chinese made goods.  It is impossible to buy any small appliance  without it being made in  China and it is made to fail almost  immediately after it is purchased.
bought a new Bunn ,simple to clean ,ready for coffee brewing ,the best coffee maker ,does make a good cup of coffee ,buy high quality ,Having good coffee at home ,impossible to buy ,
small appliance,great years,important home,warm coffee,cleanable water,good cup,plus side,last Bunn,new Bunn,ready coffee,
The Keurig SE has a clear water reservoir that holds enough water for six eight-ounce cups of coffee.   The reservoir is lit by a gentle blue glow so you can see how much water is in there.   The SE has a read out screen that tells you when you need to add more water, when the unit is ready to brew and what time it is.   It also has an automatic off feature you can set.
The overflow tray and the water resorvoir can be popped into the dishwasher when needed.  You can program the Keurig to come on and off at a certain time or you can leave it on all the time, which is recommended.  I know a number of people have complained about the pump noise.   It is a little loud, but it is only for a few seconds.   I do not find it annoying.  I also use this when I have company.
Cost is a concern.  Each K-cup costs about $0.  The counter space that the unit takes up is about twice that of a regular coffee maker, so these units are not for limited counter space situations.  The final cool feature that a B-60 has over a B-40 is the blue lighting.  The B-60 water tank is back lit with blue LED lights, that flash when you are down to your last two cups worth of water – how cool is that.  While not flashing the water is lightly back lit with the blue glow.
This unit does not come with the "My K-Cup", but you can get that by itself if you need it.   Honestly, we hardly use that.   Using the My K-Cup does require you remove the chamber that punctures the regular K-Cups.   It's not hard, just slightly tricky at first.   Again, we rarely use this.     Good luck and happy brewing.
To get a real cup of coffee I found that I had to use the 5oz option, unload and refill and repeat.   For those that like coffee that is like colored water with just a hint of taste, it will be like a gift from heaven.   Those who like to taste what they have paid for stay away.       If you do get it make sure you get it from Keurig so you can send it back.
There's varieties such as different blends of coffee, tea, cocoa, capuccinos, and lattes.  All you do is place the k-cup in the Keurig machine, and the Keurig does the rest.  It'll brew your coffee in about a minute.    My research is limited since I just purchased my Keurig.  I ca not tell you if it broke, I ca not tell you if it malfunctions in a few weeks, but I can tell you that so far, so good.  I am absolutely pleased with my Keurig in every way.
holds enough water ,Keurig SE has a clear water reservoir ,unit is ready to brew ,add more water ,has an automatic off feature ,B-40 is the blue lighting ,punctures the regular K-Cups ,get a real cup of coffee ,
blue glow,different blends,much water,such varieties,limited counter,few seconds,happy brewing,loud seconds,last cups,good weeks,
It leaves about a full cup in the carafe, unless you spilled it out already.     The LCD digital clock is NOT backlit and so cannot be read except by bending over and staring at it closely.   I called Cuisinart Customer support about it and they said the clock is to save money.     The programming control switch is also hard to read without bending over.
You can purchase his coffee maker directly through Cuisinart, at many local retailers, or via online stores.  Be sure to find the best deal possible as prices range as much as $20. 00 from place to place.     The Cuisinart DCC-1100 coffee maker includes many features.  It can brew 12 cups of coffee or by changing a setting it can brew just 1-4 cups when a full pot is not required.
Well I went to walmart and for 17 dollars bought a black and decker dlx1050 in white.  made my first pot today and its tastes like coffee.
  This model is in white and it is very attractive. The top of the machine opens very easily.   Just open it up with your own two hands.   No fancy pop ups or spring mechanisms that might break in time.   The filter area is right there on top in the middle.   No problem using paper or the chrome filter that comes with the machine.
  >It makes 13 cups in 10 minutes.   >I took the water filter and "stick" that it's on and threw them away.   You do not need them unless you are filtering sea water or living in a swamp.   >The filler hole is indeed a bit small, but I use the kitchen sprayer to fill it and just jam that sucker into the hole where the silly filter went.
After trying different beans and different amounts of coffee in the filter, it still does not make a rich cup of coffee.  It's nice and hot but not a RICH cup. so, i'm still trying.  2ND UPDATE: i found it takes twice as much coffee to make a good cup-a-joe, as in my old Braun. ORIGINAL REVIEW: We bought the Cuisinart DC1100 yesterday; flushed-cleaned with hot water and made a pot of coffee.  I was really looking forward to this as my Braun of nearly 20 yrs bit the dust.
clock is NOT backlit ,programming control switch is also hard ,prices range as much ,Be sure to find ,Cuisinart DCC-1100 coffee maker includes many features ,not make a rich cup of coffee ,trying different beans ,make a good cup-a-joe ,
good cup,backlit clock,sure deal,fancy pop,attractive model,different amounts,much coffee,first pot,many features,digital clock,
very frustrating.   We have to clean the tank often, since our well water has a good deal of minerals.   I followed the directions on cleaning that came with the maker (used white vinegar).   It was after the second cleaning that the tank began to leak.   The leak was not only around the metal plate that comes in contact with the warmer, but also around the bottom edges of the tank.       I did email customer service and received a reply the next day.
  I have owned it for over a year and have not had a single problem.   I follow directions and make sure to turn the "pot" over and run waters thru it EVERY time I clean it.   I have never had a leak.   I use it daily and it makes great tasting coffee.
Called back and talked to another person that was great.  They sent me a new pot before I had to send the defective pot . back A mailing label was included to send the old one back.  I really like not dealing with the glass pot but they need to improve the seal around the holding pot.
I'm now looking for a replacement from another vendor.  Not sure why Hamilton Beach has not recognized this issue and corrected it.  It's unfortunate.  I love the coffee maker, but I ca not continue to use it when I have to clean up the coffee off the counter every day.      It also needs a light in the filling area.
I love the "carafeless" design.   Some have cited hot parts, I have not experienced this.     No overheating at all, if anything the keep warm feature could be warmer.  I think that is the only complaint other than it IS large and takes up a lot of room.     The coffee tastes fabulous, and the large travel mugs fit under no problem, making it handy for our busy family with teens.
After it broke the first time, I was EXTRA CAREFUL not to let anything touch that cheap little part for fear of it breaking again.   Much to my despise, it broke again for no apparent reason, just because it is so cheap and frail.   And now, I am finding it impossible just to find a replacement part for it.   I have also done some research on the web and discovered that this is an occurring problem with this model for other people as well.
water has a good deal of minerals ,used white vinegar ,not had a single problem ,make sure to turn ,makes great tasting coffee ,send the defective pot ,anything the keep warm feature ,coffee tastes fabulous ,broke the first time ,
EVERY time,large lot,handy family,daily tasting,sure Hamilton,great person,good deal,frail reason,only complaint,first time,
A replaceable water filter and reusable mesh coffee filter are included.  The brewed coffee tastes just fine to me, and I do not understand the complaints I've been hearing on that front.   But I'll let you in on a secret:  We use bottled water, so I've never had use for the Cuisinart water filters. Bad experiences: The "sneak-a-cup" feature, while convenient, has a dark side: the carafe must not be positioned carelessly when brewing coffee.
  We ran water through it the first time to eliminate dust in the unit (as instructed).  Hours later the water was still hot - very hot.   Since we enjoy coffee throughout the morning, it is perfect for us.   It also eliminates having a separate thermos on the counter.
But the rest is a nightmare, too.   There is only a very small area to pour the water into the machine, and it is easy to get it into the filter and other areas.   The pause function does not work well; if you remove the pot before brewing is completed (like you're supposed to be able to do), it still drips.   Finally, the carafe itself does not pour correctly.   You have to hold it almost completely upside down to get the coffee to pour, and then it inevitable drips all over the place.
It still worked but pieces kept breaking off until it was too difficult to keep it taped together.     After some research, I decided to try the Cusinart DCC-1150, even though it had minimal reviews.   It seemed similar to the DCC-1200, which had good reviews overall.   When I went to the store, I examined both units and it seemed that they were nearly identical in how they brewed coffee, and decided to give it try.   I was assured by Bed Bath and Beyond that if I did not like the unit I could return it.
Maybe some people like their coffee just warm, but not us. Other problems:Difficult angel for filling reservoir.   Carafe pours at a painfully slow rate unless you remove the lid, which then lets out heat.   Cannot empty carafe completely without coffee going everywhere.   Cannot turn off annoying audible tone that indicates when brewing has completed.
I have had a Bunn for years but started thinking maybe always having a hot tank of water wasnt the most energy efficient.  So decided this time to go with a more traditional coffeemaker with a thermal caraffe and a brew timer.  Was concerned the caraffe would not keep the coffee hot but it really does.  The only real complaint I have is the coffee pours slowly, however it does not leak or make a mess. As for long term I have no idea how well it will hold up but as of now I am happy.
coffee tastes just fine ,use bottled water ,has a dark side ,water was still hot ,having a separate thermos on the counter ,very small area ,had good reviews ,painfully slow rate ,having a hot tank of water ,more traditional coffeemaker ,
hot water,convenient feature,identical coffee,separate thermos,overall reviews,good reviews,thermal caraffe,easy machine,inevitable drips,happy idea,
It's simple, it's smart and it works.  SIMPLE -- Components are few and easy to clean. PHD "Push Here Dummy" programming could not be simpler.  SMART design -- The removable water canister is one of those "Why did not I think of that.
  Any of you have a clean carafe after a year of abiding by the manual's instructions.   (Denture tablets clean it well, but who needs an extra step to carafe cleaning. ) Also, because of the design, liquid could never be completely removed from the carafe by just turning it upside down.   I found the handle too "fat" for my hands; I felt I did not have a good grasp on the handle for the hot liquid it was to dispense.   Water drips on hot plate or in carafe when removing the filter basket; enough said.   Coffee weak using standard setting with same grounds amount used on previous 'makers; had to always use flavor+.
The coffee looks appealing &#150 our mornings of drinking a bitter sludge from being run through a overheated, tediously slow brewing cycle are over.  The coffeemaker is attractive enough to complement our black ceramic stove and stainless side-by-side refrigerator well.  So many coffeemakers are much taller than I wanted (and most of them are just as wide).  I liked that this design is somewhat squat and compact.
I've had it for 2. 5 years now and it works as well as the first day.  The drip stop works fine.  Easy to clean.  I ca not beleive I'm saying this: easy to fill with water.  The past coffee maker I owned had a very narow opening for the water; I kept spilling water all over the counter.
  It makes excellent tasting coffee and looks good too.   A great feature.
However, it does fit on the bottom shelf of my old typical dishwaher.  I saw this coffee maker reviewed on TV by Consumer Reports, along with 10 others, specifically for brewing temperature.  Apparently, most coffee makers do not brew the coffee at a high enough temp.  This was the only coffee maker that CRs singled out that had high enough brewing temp at a great price, it was compared to makers priced at $100+.  I bought the coffee maker that same day for $39 at Target.
easy to clean ,Components are few ,tediously slow brewing cycle ,mornings of drinking a bitter sludge ,coffeemaker is attractive ,So many coffeemakers ,design is somewhat squat ,easy to fill with water ,very narow opening for the water ,makes excellent tasting coffee ,had high enough brewing temp ,the only coffee maker ,
old dishwaher,compact design,stainless side,great feature,most coffeemakers,typical dishwaher,attractive coffeemaker,extra step,high temp,good coffee,
Most coffee cups will work--I've used a regular dinner service mug as well as one of my 20 oz soup mugs.  Very wide mugs (like super-size latte mugs) may not work as well.     Getting started    The instructions are simple, and there's a 45 second demo video on the website if you do not believe it.  Realize that you're making a concentrated drink (unlike French press where you're making it more "full strength") and be patient with the process.  you'll make a strong shot (or four) that can be taken plain, diluted with water or milk, served over ice, or blended into ice cream concoctions.      Coffee is mostly water    As with all of my reviews, I recommend filtered or bottled water.
I had a cheap Krupps steam machine years ago, and gave it away  because it was awful to use.     I was all set to spend more than $200 for a Saeco when I spotted the AeroPress on Amazon.  I bought it based on the many favorable comments at Amazon.      I've been using the AeroPress ever since.  What great coffee and espresso.  I can even make great crema when doing double shots.
  I usually use water that was pulled off the boil a couple of min before using (about 195).   Usually I boil the water and as soon as the water comes to a boil, I remove the kettle from heat and prepare the coffee maker.   By the time I am done, the water is at the perfect temperature. After you pour the coffee, let it sit for 10 seconds then use the included stirrer to rapidly stir the coffee for another 10 seconds.   Take the stirrer out and put the plunger in place.
Grind to a medium fine grind (not espresso) and add to the brewer using the funnel provided.       4 Place the AeroPress brew cylinder on a large mug or equivalent sturdy container.       5 Use the calibrated plunger to measure water that has been heated to about 180 degrees (not quite boiling).   I use one of those instant hot water taps on my sink but a microwave oven works just as well. Pour a little of the water on the grounds and give the cylinder a swirl to wet the grounds and pour in the rest of the water.
Try it, and yo will see how true this is. The brew you get this way is so much smoother, and free of acidity.  At first it takes a thermometer to figure out when the water is at the right temperature.      I like my coffee in the morning with lots of hot milk.  This coffee maker is great for your "latte" because you can make the brew very strong.  (Never put coffee brew to heat   in a microwave.
Whatever the secret, the result is a rich, remarkably smooth, un-bitter brew.     What's more, making the coffee does not require a PhD in barristology, nor does it take a platoon of scullery maids to clean up after.   The coffee thus created is rich and balanced.   It's damn good stuff.
've used a regular dinner service mug ,Very wide mugs ,instructions are simple ,patient with the process ,making a concentrated drink ,make a strong shot ,had a cheap Krupps steam machine years ,awful to use ,doing double shots ,make great crema ,coffee maker is great ,
true yo,second demo,bitter brew,strong brew,favorable comments,sturdy container,more Saeco,double shots,perfect temperature,much way,
I like the separate water tank to avoid pouring water all over the top of the unit.   The frother also works well for any quick hot water need.     The video makes setup and use easy.     the controls are simple to understand and easy to use.
This new coffee maker brews 10 smooth cups in 8 minutes and is ready to froth milk at the same time.   There was no paper taste because the Capresso uses a gold mesh filter in the brewing basket.  There was no worry about forgetting to turn off the coffee pot after going to work.  The Capresso turns itself off automatically.  There is no glass container to break because the Capresso has a metal carafe that keeps coffee hot without power for several hours.  The milk frother works much better than cheaper brands.
I'm a lover of American cappucchino (AKA: cafe au lait.  That's a thing of the past now.  The frother feature works like a charm and is so easy, a four year old could do it.  The machine itself is solidly built and has the look and feel of real quality.  It comes with an 8 minute video for the few people who will not be able to master its functions in two to three minutes of playing around with it.
Our regular coffee suddenly tasted so much better.  I think the high temperature of the water and the thermal carafe made all the difference.  The coffee starts out much better when it drips into the pot, and there's no burner underneath to convert it to mud.     I tried to discover the joys of frothed milk, but only succeeded in making a beverage that I did not really want.
If I was going to spend money on something like a high-end coffeemaker, I made sure that I did my homework first.  I wanted a coffeemaker that had a timer, caraffe that maintains hot coffee, without the need for a warming plate and is fairly easy to maintain.     I ordered my CoffeeTec through their website, I chose the black model, it looks very classy and appears to be well built.  The thermal caraffe is made of stainless steel, it came with its own milk container, frothing parts and video tape.
One benefit is that it makes both hot chocolate and drip coffee.  Mornings are kinda hectic around our house but the Coffee TEC helps save time by making great drip coffee for us and hot chocolate for the kids.     The digital clock/timer works like a charm.  Our coffee ready and waiting for us when we awake.
like the separate water tank ,easy to use ,controls are simple to understand ,milk frother works much better ,think the high temperature of the water ,maintains hot coffee ,fairly easy to maintain ,chose the black model ,makes both hot chocolate ,time by making great drip coffee ,Mornings are kinda hectic ,
better coffee,froth milk,hot chocolate,hot coffee,new coffee,able functions,thermal caraffe,easy use,ready coffee,ready milk,
I read most of these reviews and I need to make some corrections.   1)  Unlike the stovetop ones, this Presto electric percolator does not need the filter cup to be removed once it's completed brewing.   When the light goes on, it means that it is stopped perking (brewing).   The percolator then switches from high heat, for perking, to a lower heat to keep the coffee warm.
I looked long and hard for a coffee maker that did not use plastic in the area that touches the coffee.   I use GLAD plastic wrap as it is one of the few that uses pure polyethylene but that is another story entirely.   I use special freezer glass jars for leftovers and freezing too.     I was about to buy a non-electric coffee percolator when I spotted the Presto.  (Walmart- $39. 95)   It makes wonderful hot coffee.
It has an easy and convenient set up that is suitable for all of your needs.  It makes easy storage for you and is also good for when you want to make fast coffee.  Most coffee pots take a longer time to brew coffee unlike the Presto 2811 12-Cup Coffee maker, perculator.  Getting back to the filter parts.  A filter is not required for your Presto 2811 12-Cup Coffee maker.  All you have to do is wash the chamber instead of using a throw out filter its as easy as one two three.
We wash everything in the sink but we do not submerge the pot.   Every once in awhile we use Dip-it and run a cycle to clean out the residue.   The stainless steel exterior is very easy to keep clean and shiny.     As with most of the percolators the Presto had a removable plug, a basket, the basket lid, the percolator itself and the percolator lid.   Of the three cited in the first paragraph the Presto was my least favorite.   Ease of use, the coffee flavor and the speed of brewing were are equal however the Presto was more difficult to clean and was the shortest lived.
the pot still operates perfectly).   It is a space saver, does not use filters and does not require constant cleaning with vinegar.   HOwever, my husband decided he wanted to try a Mr.  Coffee that had a delay start on it (which we barely used)and after 3 months it completely failed.   The burner does not warm up and the water does not pump out.   So I "broke out" my trusty Presto and we are wondering what to do with the Mr.
I did not want an aluminum coffee maker.  I've seen the display models in the stores already scratched up and looking old. I use it about once a week, usually to make tea since we moved to Texas in 1991.  Two large tea bags for a pot.  The I unplug it and let the tea cool down to about 100 degrees F.  I put it in a plastic half gallon  bottle that originally came with cranberry juce.
read most of these reviews ,use special freezer glass jars for leftovers ,buy a non-electric coffee percolator ,makes wonderful hot coffee ,makes easy storage ,coffee pots take a longer time ,steel exterior is very easy to keep ,percolators the Presto had a removable plug ,speed of brewing were are equal ,not require constant cleaning with vinegar ,
stovetop ones,least Presto,easy filter,clean exterior,shiny exterior,longer time,equal Presto,shortest Presto,cool tea,trusty Presto,
If you get it, you WILL NOT be disappointed.   I figure that even with the price of the machine and the T-disks, it will pay for itself with what I save from buying my lattes at Starbuck's.   GO FOR IT.
it broke in January. I sent it for repairs.   Now it's the middle of March.   Company gives you the run around about repairs or refund.   No I would not but again.
We love our Tassimo and have been using it every day since we bought it.  The selections are great and so far, we have tried the Gevalia Coffee, Latte, Cappuccino, Tea & Hot Cocoa.  All of them are very high quality and have been perfect.  It is very fast and very easy to use.
I've had European cocoa in six European countries, never have I had a cup of cocoa in Europe taste like Tassimo's, terrible.   The regular Gevalia coffee is very strong, even in a big cup.       My wife likes the Tassimo because she doesn&#146t drink hot beverages of any sort; she thinks it has technicool cachet.  On the plus side, once you throw the used cartridge away and apologize to the planet, you are done cleaning up.
Hi, I purchased this device to repeat(broadcast) a poor wireless signal in my house.  Although I did run into a little set-up issue, Belkin tech support was able to assist me.  The push button for Easy One-Step Configuration does work perfect as long as you do not have WEP enabled on your wireless router.  If it finds any open wireless system transmission it will automatically significantly boost the signal to an excellent signal strength.   It worked great for me with a Linksys.  This Belkin device can also be used as an  Wireless Access Point.
You just have to clean it a little more often.    -You ca not use really big coffee cups.   Your traditional size coffee cups will fit fin, maybe even a little bigger.   If you want to fill up a travel mug you will have to pour it from a regular coffee cup.   -Sometimes  it takes longer then others to heat up.
selections are great ,very high quality ,very easy to use ,'ve had European cocoa ,Gevalia coffee is very strong ,Belkin tech support was able to assist ,Easy One-Step Configuration does work perfect ,not use really big coffee cups ,
European countries,excellent signal,technicool cachet,able support,traditional size,terrible Tassimo,great Linksys,perfect quality,wireless router,regular coffee,
If you are having an "overflow" problem when making larger amounts (8-14 cups), simply --> PUT A PAPER FILTER INSIDE THE GOLD BASKET.   <--That's all you need to do. )Anyway, folks, this is a good coffee maker, and it's one design flaw is VERY easily compensated for.
It is esthetically attractive and the controls are easy to identify and use.   Setting the clock and brew timer are very easy and graphics identify the buttons.  The hinged lid allows open access to the basket assembly and to fill the reservoir.  You can pour from the front, side or rear compartment and the carafe has perfect aim and never drips.
It must be becasue of the insulated stainless carafe.   I've emptied it out to wash it 6 hours after I made the coffee and it was still hot.   This is way better than all the other glass carafes I've had on coffee makers.   The "needs cleaning" light is also handy to alert you when your coffee pot needs to be cleaned.
until it failed.  We are returning the KCM534 after 22 days because it repeatedly displays err2 or err3 on the digital display.  We are impressed with the Kitchenaid replacement warranty but wish the coffee maker would have just continued to work properly.  Kitchenaid is sending a replacement unit which will arrive in 7-14 business days.
We have had this coffee maker for a little over a year and given that we paid ~$90 for it, I'd frankly have expected it to last a little longer.  Since our unit was just out-of-warranty (one year), KitchenAid would not send a replacement.  According to message boards, this error is very common.  If you are in warranty, KitchenAid will replace the unit.  Most instances of the error occurring seemed to be when the unit was only just out-of-warranty.
The KitchenAid, which I saw both good and bad reviews for, seemed like a slightly safer bet, though a bit frumpy looking compared to the Krups.  We have been delighted with the ease of use, solid construction and reliable operation of the KitchenAid.  Highly recommended, and I'm pleased to say we had none of the electrical problems noted by negative reviewers for this machine.
making larger amounts ,a good coffee maker ,controls are easy to identify ,brew timer are very easy ,lid allows open access ,carafe has perfect aim ,becasue of the insulated stainless carafe ,impressed with the Kitchenaid replacement warranty ,unit was just out-of-warranty ,unit was only just out-of-warranty ,delighted with the ease of use ,
frumpy bit,open access,Most instances,good reviews,attractive controls,rear compartment,good coffee,common error,solid construction,electrical problems,
I add the liquor into a larger cup and then brew the coffee into that cup.   The second brew is weaker than the first, but when mixed together, the taste is still quite good.     My friend likes cream in his coffee.   I discovered that I needed to place the cream in the cup first and heat it in the microwave for 20 seconds before brewing the coffee.
The Senseo gives me that commercial coffee shop flavor and temperature and does it fast.  The Senseo has a nice clean look with excellent ergonomics.  The water container slips on and off making refilling a synch under the kitchen sink.  The loading of pods and cleaning of the main components is simple making maintenance on the low end.
It's easy to use.   There's a water container on the back that you remove and fill with cold water  to either MAXIMUM, 4 oz. , depending what size cup you would like to make.   You can either use one or two pods, depending on if you want a 4 oz.  or an 8 oz.
When I have a cup, that's usually all I ever drink - a single cup.  So, making a full pot of coffee is a complete waste.  I'm definitely part of the target market for the Senseo Single Serve Coffee System.     Since I had tried the Senseo when I visited my fabulous mother-in-law, I knew that the quality of coffee brewed by the Senseo was to my liking.
Setup is extremely simple, but it's very important that you follow the instructions and "prime" the boiler first.   Be sure to have something there to catch the water.     Once this priming step is complete, you're all ready to use the machine.   Making coffee has never been simpler, provided that you're only interested in one or two cups.   The definition of a "cup" is relative, as the "2 cup" setting makes what I consider to be one cup.   To make your coffee, ensure that there is a sufficient amount of water in the reservoir.
I found this style when I went shopping.  I thought it was a bit much. though after drinking my coffee. I am so pleased.
taste is still quite good ,brew is weaker ,Senseo has a nice clean look ,components is simple ,easy to use ,a complete waste ,making a full pot of coffee ,step is complete ,ready to use the machine ,
relative cup,low end,fabulous mother,first brew,ready machine,excellent ergonomics,simple maintenance,good taste,second brew,cold water,
That seems to be what's happening on this timer.  It may just be a fluke on this particular piece, as I ca not imagine it being broken for everyone.      And as with all pause and serve coffeemakers I've seen and used, this one drips from time to time with the carafe removed.      There are a few coffeemakers out there with 5 cup capacity, which would probably be better for folks who use large cups.      And another quick hint, you'll have to clean the machine less often if you use filtered water rather than straight tap water.
I have owned Mr.  Coffee products before and have found them to be a reliable and decent manufacturer.  The only thing that bothers me is when you are rinsing the pot out - the lid is not so easy to flip open with your thumb.   All in all it's no big deal.
  While looking online at Target. com, I compared all of the coffee makers.   We have the world's smallest amount of counter space in our kitchen, so a large coffee maker was out of the question.   We opted for this model of the Mr.  Coffee brand.   This coffee maker says it is a 4-cup model.
With the DRX5, you ca not close the top if the basket is not inserted correctly, so there is no possibility of dumping water.     Once I added water, it made the coffee faster than the B&D, and no evidence of ground splash-back.     It does not require any more coffee grounds than the B&D - and all of them stay in the filter, so the coffee is stronger than the B&D.   Once I remembered to add water, the delay brew has worked perfectly every morning.   I also like that it stays hot - the B&D did not use a warming plate - it was a grab-n-go mug.   I'll also try a perma-filter.
Until she bought this coffee maker for me, I made instant coffee every morning.  Now I can have a good cup of coffee in the morning.  That is the first thing I do.  Sometimes I set the timer, so that my coffee awaits me when I come downstairs.  I love to smell it brewing when I wake up.
I recently moved to a new house, and decided the big coffee maker was overkill, and all I needed was a 4-cup model.   I did not want to spend a lot of money, so looking at the options I decided on the Mr.  Coffee DRX5 for $19, since it had all the features I was looking for, specifically auto shut off, and pause and serve.   Here are more of the details on this model:    ~ Product Description    The Mr.   The brew basket does not swing out for removal - you just lift the cover and then lift out the basket.   There are two little looped handles on the basket, which I find easy enough to grip to pull it out.
use large cups ,a few coffeemakers ,use filtered water ,lid is not so easy to flip ,a 4-cup model ,made instant coffee every morning ,decided the big coffee maker ,needed was a 4-cup model ,
large cups,looped basket,good cup,quick hint,instant coffee,filtered water,little basket,easy grip,easy lid,few coffeemakers,
I am a coffee fanatic and figured since I spend so much buying coffees why not get a machine I could use to make my own.   The ease of use for this machine is incredible.   Right from the start I have been using the espresso portion to make mochas, both hot and blended, and they are EXCELLENT.   The coffee portion is also very convenient and makes great coffee.
I had previous success with Krups coffeemakers, so when our Cuisinart burned out we went again with a trusted brand.   Like so many other consumer items, "they do not make 'em like they used to. "  The XP 1500 is constructed of rather flimsy plastic, and the swing out coffee basket never seems to come out easily or fit back correctly.   Worse, the coffee basket is too small for our #4 metal cone filter, and I will have to find one that fits.     For now, we are using unbleached Melitta paper filters.
This coffee maker is a far cry from the Krups coffee maker it replaced.   The earlier coffee maker was very well constructed and is now replacing the newer Krups XP1500 coffee maker.     The basket handle broke off within the first year of ownership and the handle for the caraffe broke at almost the two year point.     Krups does not respond to complaints or questions relating to replacement parts for their products.   Exceptionally poor customer service.
Poor life time.  This is the second Krups that I bought that died within 6 months.  I tried cleaning and it still does not work.   Trying to fix it by giving to a repair facility.
Never again.  That lesson is the only value I got out of the $100 I spent on this coffee maker.  It broke at the 6-month 1-day mark.  Before it broke, I'd say the coffee was just OK, but the espresso was excellent.  It was a nice looking coffee machine, but form over function only goes so far when you need a cup of joe .
every cup has been a good cup.     The cappuccino/espresso half has been enjoyable, and I found it to be extremely quiet for an espresso maker.  I was disappointed that the machine did not come with a vessel for frothing milk.     The only other annoyance I've had thus far is, when I had mine shipped to rather-balmy Atlanta, the adhesive on their 'try me.  Not a huge concern, but I've been trying to get it off since I got the machine 2 months ago.
spend so much buying coffees ,use for this machine is incredible ,coffee portion is also very convenient ,had previous success with Krups coffeemakers ,coffee basket is too small ,using unbleached Melitta paper filters ,replacing the newer Krups ,the second Krups ,espresso was excellent ,cup has been a good cup ,cappuccino\/espresso half has been enjoyable ,extremely quiet for an espresso maker ,
enjoyable half,small basket,good cup,nice coffee,other annoyance,huge concern,only annoyance,many consumer,own machine,only value,
It makes great espresso, and looks great on the counter.   As an added plus, it makes coffee as well.   I never had a problem with the brewing of coffee or the great espresso it made.   If you want to steam milk, you're going to have to be very careful.   About 2/3 of the time the steam wand will "blow off" and shoot into your milk, causing an explosion.   I do not know how many times I have had to clean splattered milk off the counter, the side of the machine, and the underside of the cabinets.
Once that beans and pot are in place, it is a simple 4 button combination to start the coffee brewing.  As one might guess, this process is overcomplicated by a ways and actually required consultation with the owner's manual.  This is certainly the first coffee maker I have ever had which required that little unmanly action.    On this same first using of the machine we also attempted the venerable espresso.  This met with less satisfaction than the coffee.
The glass coffee pot was really a cheap affair and, I think poorly designed, i.     Despite this, we decided to work with the machine and made some adjustments and were reasonably satisfied with its performance.   Then, as the fairy tale goes, it all came to an end.   The machine just died; would not start at all.   I think its software programming (which ran the clock, 24 hour programming and other functions) had total coffee machine brain failure.     The moral to the story:  Be very careful when buying combination drip coffee/espresso machines.
I received this machine as a Christmas and let me say I felt cheated.    The frothing nozzle is downright junk, the end flies off in mid steam and splashes milk everywhere scaring the @#$% out of me.    Yes the instructions are hard to follow and the controls are not the best either.  Yes I had to give up drip coffee but my new machine is so fun.
I also have had 2 of these machines, had to return the 1st a week after purchasing b/c multiple things started to all of as sudden not work.  Then the 2nd, I have had for 3 mos - and suddenly is not even getting power.  This is a piece of junk and waste of every penny.   Best advice, DO NOT BUY this maker.  I will never buy a KRUPS again from my experience with this machine.
I love this machine.  Not only will it look fantastic on your bench, but it is easy to clean and makes a lovely cup of coffee.  You can decide on the strength too and it is really quick.  I can honestly say I use this machine every morning and even sneak one in on an evening too now.
looks great on the counter ,makes great espresso ,clean splattered milk off the counter ,required that little unmanly action ,attempted the venerable espresso ,had total coffee machine brain failure ,instructions are hard to follow ,makes a lovely cup of coffee ,
great espresso,many times,easy bench,2nd mos,lovely cup,great counter,cheap affair,moral story,best controls,multiple things,
I made that mistake only once; coffee appears almost instantly when the lid goes down.  Now put the cover on the carafe, put it under the basket, close the top lid and in three minutes you have  a pot of coffee.  There is a small hole in the center of the carafe lid through which the brewed coffee enters the carafe.     I found the lid fit really snug and it is thick.  You turn it about a tenth of a turn to release it and then wiggle it out of there to open.
" Honestly, I went through five carafes that they sent to me for replacements and 2 full coffeemakers and an now on my third full coffeemaker.  For the $150. 00 that I paid, I have not gotten my moneys worth.  It has been a pain.  It is very embarrassing to have company and your fancy little $150. 00 coffee carafe leaks when you pour coffee.
I ended up buying a used, commercial-grade Bunn brewer at a garage sale and finally got the tasty coffee I was accustomed to.  The commercial maker took up too much space on the counter though, and after three years, I've now purchased this thermal-carafe Bunn brewer.  I did not think the classic Bunn design could really be improved, but the thermal carafe proved me wrong.     You can expect to get at least 10 years of service from a Bunn brewer if you keep it clean.  Lime build-up is about the only thing to worry about, and cleaning every few months can be a pain, but that's the only drawback I can think of.
Many people simply run vinegar through the pot, as the weak acetic acid will dissolve the particulate buildup inside the pot.   This gets the tank completely cleaned, and the tank can then be rinsed and washed while out of the unit, allowing it to dry completely as well.       Recall of products    IN July of 2005 Bunn recalled 1. 75 million units including some of the BT-10B.   This was done as a very low percentage of users (17 total) had the bowl or lid melt from a malfunction.   If you are looking to buy a used BT-10B or already have one, check this site out for the information on the recall:      http://www.
Often, the coffee would overflow and I'd find myself in a sleepy stupor wiping up hot coffee grounds in the middle of a murky swamp of "coffee.   Yes, I should have returned it after the first month, but instead I contacted Bunn and asked, "what is up with this. "  I thought I just got a reject machine.   I was hoping I missed a recall or something.   No response from Bunn.   Anyway to make a long story short, I gave up, bought a coffee pot from the local drugstore for $29.
20+ years using a regular Bunn (hot plate) before if finally gave up.   The Thermal carafe looked to be great.   It did all that the other reviewer claim EXCEPT make a good cup of coffee.   We try the same coffee/grind/etc in other coffee makers (including the old style Bunn) and it is great.
purchased this thermal-carafe Bunn brewer ,too much space on the counter ,not think the classic Bunn design ,cleaning every few months ,years using a regular Bunn ,EXCEPT make a good cup of coffee ,including the old style Bunn ,try the same coffee\/grind\/etc ,
thermal carafe,full coffeemakers,good cup,regular Bunn,fancy company,commercial grade,Many people,other reviewer,worth moneys,long story,
I explained the problem again and they said there should be no problem returning it to Sears.       I've decided not to keep the coffee maker.   It's going back to Sears.  I'm very disappointed with the carafe's inability to be taken apart and cleaned or at least adjusted.
)    The coffee maker is very easy to program, so you can have up to 8 cups of fresh coffee when you wake up.   If you do not want to wait, as sometimes we do not, it has a sneak a cup feature.   (I've only used that once, and am happy to say that it works beautifully. )  The carafe seems to stain on the inside, but cleaning the coffee maker with white vinegar monthly will take care of that.   It takes regular coffee filters, or if you prefer, you can use a permanent filter basket.
In my arrogance, I thought, "well, clearly they just did not know how to use it".   So, I ordered one.     The first time I used it, it made coffee.   It was hot and tasted good.
A water measure on the maker advises how many cups of water have been poured into the water reservoir .       Details:  I chose this model and design over others expressly because of the carafe.  However, I have been very disappointed in the coffee makers performance.  Using the standard measure of ground coffee to water results in a very weak cup of coffee.  Often all of the grounds in the brew-cup are not wet, indicating that the water flowed through the grounds too quickly.
and was cool to boot. and was usually either too strong or too weak.      For just drinkable coffee,  really far too much work.  This was no longer possible.      As well, I had 2 of those coffee ground-water messes that all coffee makers have occasionally if everything is not lined up perfectly.
This has happened many times at work and it is a royal pain to clean up the mess.      This also does not have a turn off button so you have to unplug it to turn it off if it's in the middle of exploding.  We are now petitioning to our managers for a new coffee maker.     I usually like Black & Decker machines but this one is a safety hazard.  If you buy it, you will need many wads of paper towels to clean up the messes in your future.
coffee maker is very easy ,takes regular coffee filters ,use a permanent filter basket ,very weak cup of coffee ,Using the standard measure of ground coffee ,grounds in the brew-cup are not wet ,really far too much work ,has happened many times at work ,
new coffee,least inability,many times,many wads,many cups,standard measure,royal pain,wet cup,white vinegar,first time,
The lid and inside of the thermal carafe smells like old coffee/cigarette smell.   And this is coming from a non smoking home.   Highly disappointed, will not recommend this product to anyone.
This machine is so bad.   It was fine the first 4 times I used it (even the programmable feature did fine), but the 5th and 6th time I used it everything went bad on it.   The 5th time it overflowed all over my counter top and even a little on the floor and there were coffee grounds in my coffee. I have no idea why this happened.
We wash ours daily.  Brew it fresh.   Our brewed coffee rarely lasts an hour.  Even with this carafe system the coffee is noticeably degraded by then.
I know more and more people are using black and stainless appliances in their kitchens but come on, lots still have white appliances.     We have never had any of the malfunctions that others have mentioned.  It functions perfectly well.  There are two things we do not like about this system.
This thing has a stainless lined carafe and after six months of use the metallic flavor still taints the coffee.   The clock/control panel is a complete joke; very hard to see due to the fact that it is very small and not illuminated.   The fill lines are too hard to see, and the lid on the carafe will make you want to chuck the thing in the trash.   Avoid this piece of junk.
I have owned two of these pots and both overflowed.  I discovered finally that the cause of this problem is a faulty carafe lid.  There is a hollow ball inside the lid that is supposed to float and allow the coffee that comes out of the filter basket to flow into the pot.  However, the little ball cracks after some use and instead of floating, it fills up with coffee and can no longer float.  Instead, it blocks the opening into the pot and a big mess follows.  The entire lid can be replaced, but I expect that the replacement would contain the same defective hollow float.
machine is so bad ,carafe system the coffee is noticeably degraded ,have white appliances ,people are using black ,clock\/control panel is a complete joke ,fill lines are too hard to see ,problem is a faulty carafe lid ,a hollow ball inside the lid ,
more people,5th time,hard joke,fine feature,degraded coffee,complete joke,white appliances,little ball,first times,old coffee,
This is the 3rd Krups grind/brew maker we've purchased.  What a disappointment.  At least it's predecessors lasted nearly a year. three months into our latest one, the grinder no longer functions.
  It was a little difficult to figure out at first (but it was midnight - in my pj's - half asleep) But it worked great right from the start.   Made one adjustment to the grind and the amount of water to get the next brew strength the way he likes it and that’s that.  It is easy to set up, easy to clean.   The pour from the carafe was a little messy the first time as we were not use to it.  But now we just pour a little slower.
*I find the machine easy to clean and maintain, including the coffee grinder. *Automatic discontinuation of drip if you remove the pot allows you to pour yourself a cup in mid-brew.   My recommendation is not to do this anywhere before your brewing has gone less than half way unless you like exceptionally strong coffee.   I phoned and had a new basket in about 7 days as promised without any difficulty.   In the meantime, I rigged the mechanism with a plastic-coated twist-tie. *Has a water filter if you choose to use it.
I cant say enough how disgusted I am with this machine. I bought Krups because our other Krups was getting a little old (4 years now).  I expected the NEW machine to work at least that long.  My question is: Does anyone care about the quality of customer care anymore.
I took in for repair as instructed by Krups, and got it back in worse condition than before.  I contacted the repair center, and the best they could offer is there is not much they can do about this product.  I called Krups to ask what I could do about this, and they said to just keep taking it back to the same place.
Noise:   I was surprised how quite this machine is compared to the other grind and brews.  The loud grinder of the coffee pot would wake me up before my alarm would go off on my previous pots and I slept right through this one.      Appearance:   The coffee maker looks like a quality piece of kitchen equipment.  It is a bit bigger then I thought it would be, but its size gives it a presence on the counter.
worked great right from the start ,get the next brew strength the way ,easy to clean ,easy to set ,carafe was a little messy ,easy to clean ,brewing has gone less ,had a new basket ,
best center,least predecessors,same place,easy machine,half pj,bigger size,asleep pj,great right,little midnight,first time,
In addition, if the pot is not centered exactly on the heater plate, the unit backs up and overflows with a giant mess.   This happened a few times before I learned to be really careful replacing the pot.   The detachable pot lid brackets broke and I have not been able to replace the carafe.
For me my choice was made due to the fact I love Black & Decker products, and their products make me feel that I am getting my monies worth.   I like this also due to the sleek style and it offered dripless spout and an "ergonomic" handle.   Which plainly means to relieve any discomfort one may get when using the coffeepot itself.           There is a one-piece cover to water container and the basket.   Has very easy to clean controls and uses a touch pad for easy to press control buttons.
Not worth the feature.  If pot is not returned to proper forward position, coffee will back up into the basket while brewing and pour over top.  Once that happens, the electrical pad will stop working and the coffee pot is dead.  You ca not even get into the panel to try and dry things out.
I purchased the SmartBrew Deluxe based on price for the many features and B&D's reputation, but after only five months the unit stopped working.   Unplugging the unit was the only way to turn it off.   The LED only displays 1200 now and no buttons on the control panel work.     I would consider replacing the unit, but I really could not stand the 4 loud beeps the unit emits at the end of the brew cycle.   They are loud enough to wake the whole house up.   I wanted hot coffee when my alarm clock went off, I did not want the coffeemaker to be the alarm.
When we brought it home I was thrilled how wonderful this coffee maker worked and all the extras it comes with.   It had 7 levels of heat and would stay on as long as 4 hours.  But to no avail, the coffee maker quit on me today.   I have only had it two months.   The lights come on, but nothing happens.
The first one was defective - would not brew properly, and the reservoir leaked onto the counter.  I returned it to get an identical one - I figured it was probably just a defective item.  It worked well - for about two months.  Then it would not turn off.
happened a few times ,able to replace ,a one-piece cover ,Has very easy to clean ,easy to press control buttons ,coffee pot is dead ,unit was the only way ,loud enough to wake ,wanted hot coffee ,one was defective ,
electrical pad,long hours,worth monies,only way,giant mess,due style,defective one,dripless style,whole house,loud beeps,
All the other parts get washed in the washing machine every so often.  You can also use a No.  4 paper filter and skip cleaning the filter.     My only complaint is that I wish it had a backlight for the display, but I understand the newer ones have this.
Back to customer service and ordered a new pot.   When the replacement part arrives, if it does the same thing I'm sending the whole thing back for a refund.    We've had various Mr Coffee type makers for the last 25 years and none of them had the handle come off the pot.   When I spend top dollar, I want a top product.      The coffee maker does what it says it will do and is fairly easy to operate.   The timer to grind and brew coffee at a set time works fine.
Capresso's customer service is bad, they will not take it back.   The store that I bought it from has 7 day return policy.     I wish I had bought the Mellitta Mill n' Brew like my friend RP told me to.   I had an excellent cup of coffee at her house.
Capresso advertises that this coffee maker 453 has "Over 200° F brew".   Do not believe it.   I checked it not just once but numerous times.   And I checked it before it even hit the filter; at the brew.   It was only 180 degrees at most.
The machine keeps track of your brewing cycles and alerts you to change the filter after about 60 pots.     The carafe warming plate has a two hour extendable auto shut off.   A drip stop function lets you steal a cup while the coffee is still brewing.     This is a 10 cup 50oz.
In order to make a good pot of coffee, I have to set 10 cups of beans and add 6 cups water.   Fine for just me, but when company comes over it's tough.   Capresso service is great - I'm on my 3rd upgrade since the LCDs keep burning out; each time I pay $40 to get a new out-of-warranty maker.   However, I've had it with this and am going to jump to the K-cups.   More expensive cup of coffee, but more consistent results.
ordered a new pot ,sending the whole thing ,spend top dollar ,had an excellent cup of coffee ,make a good pot of coffee ,get a new out-of-warranty maker ,Capresso service is great ,more consistent results ,More expensive cup of coffee ,
excellent cup,good pot,tough company,other parts,numerous times,new pot,various Mr,newer ones,new warranty,bad service,
I find the window, while awkward, to be your best bet for measuring.     There is definitely a learning curve to this system, but once you get used to it you'll love it.     I have arthritis in my wrist and thumb, which makes lifting a full carafe of hot coffee painful and potentially dangerous.  This dispensing system alleviates that concern.  It is just like getting water out of the fridge door.      I viewed other models that were more than twice the price of this, and it is hard for me to imagine that they are that much better.
cracked screws, etc.  I'd like to get a replacement screen filter and see if this makes a difference. but other than this it is a good pot and makes tasty, hot coffee.
Style fits our need for a quick coffee fix for 6 staff members who can just stop by for a quick fill up to top off -plus no carafe to clean or break.   Big problem is no it leaks coffe onto our work counter and we can no longer use it after only 7 months.   Cannot seem to find a replacement seal.   Would be glad to replace the seal at intervals if we could only not have to junk the pot.   THIS IS NOT SUSTAINABILITY HAMILTON BEACH.
The drip catcher on the bottom looks brand new on my machine due to never having to had to catch a drip.  Now, with the BubbaKeg we do need to pull the machine forward, but really - is that such an issue.  When you have a mug that big you need to compromise on things.  It does not effect the machine, but it does make it even harder for me to pour the water into the water holding tank.
Hamilton Beach 47665 BrewStation Plus12-Cup Automatic Drip Coffee Maker is a low watt coffee maker.  Its Black-silver color gives a simple and modest look.  The design is good and makes it handy.  User will not have any difficulty with this.  It has a ready push-button feature which is very useful for the user.   It has a Gentle warming heater.
Began leaking on counter last month discovered cracks in screw holes on bottom of tank.  Could only order new tank directly from Hamiton Beach by phone.  Original cost of machine-$50, cost of new tank-$10. 99 shipping$11.  Not a good value for a coffee maker under 2 years old.
viewed other models ,a good pot ,glad to replace ,Maker is a low watt coffee maker ,design is good ,has a ready push-button feature ,very useful for the user ,has a Gentle warming heater ,
new tank,hot coffee,modest look,handy design,quick coffee,Began counter,simple look,good value,big mug,last month,
I've had for about 2 weeks.   It is such an improvement over the Mr Coffee that I had since college.     The control knob seems cheap and scares me it will break but I've seen no reviews that makes me believe this will be a problem.     You do have to hold the carafe in your right hand to see the numbers when filling with water.
However, be prepared to accept it is a disposable kitchen item that must be replaced on a yearly basis.   Never have I gotten more than 18 months from one, using it on average twice a day.   This one lasted 14 months.   Personally, I'm now spending time investigating other coffeemakers that pride themselves in quality AND include an excellent cup of coffee to boot.   If Krups ever sees the light, I'd come running back.
First, the machine takes a very long time to brew a full carafe; perhaps 12-14 minutes or more.   It has a timer, but who really uses them.   The sneak-a-cup feature works, but I do not like using it because the coffee is often too strong or too weak, depending on when you sneak.  My old Krups was done in half the time.     Second, the carafe design is just plain bad.
God forbid anything breaks on your coffee maker because getting parts is impossible.  I broke two things on mine, which were my fault.  I broke the glass pot, and I broke a peice of the duo-filter.  I ordered these parts directly from Krups, and that was 2 1/2 months ago.  They ca not even tell me when the parts might be available.
This appears to work pretty well when we use it as well.   If you need replacement parts including these filters they can be obtained here :  http://www. nelsonappliance. htm    I have only found 2 drawbacks to this machine.   The first is a real nuisance.   This takes some getting used to but once you figure it out the problem does not occur too often.
I have owned one of these for two years now.   There is no doubt that it makes an excellent cup of coffee.     The thing to consider above all else is that finding replacement water filters is next to impossible.   It seems that there is a permanent situation whereby Krups (or whoever now owns this division) just does not manufacture replacement cartridges.   It took many calls and several months on a waiting list to get replacement filters.   I think that this is a serious limitation.
a disposable kitchen item ,include an excellent cup of coffee ,machine takes a very long time ,brew a full carafe ,carafe design is just plain bad ,parts is impossible ,makes an excellent cup of coffee ,replacement water filters is next ,
excellent cup,next filters,old Krups,such improvement,many calls,bad design,right hand,several months,available parts,impossible parts,
not one spec of scale.  as I told the support guy, it is a logic board or pump failure and the machine is too expensive to only last 18 months.   I have friends that have also gotten only 18 months out of the machine however they do not confront problems.  unless Keurig offers a better deal, I will not buy another.
My wife and I purchased our Keurig Coffee Maker with the full understanding that neither the maker nor the coffee was cheap.   We are very pleased with the both in spite of the price.   If a person wants a cup of coffee for a cheap price then this is not for you.   As for us, we really, really do crave and appreciate a great cup of coffee occasionally and we do not mind paying for it.  If this is your attitude then this is for you.       If you're a big coffee drinker who drinks coffee all day long, then you may want to stay with your by the pot coffee maker.
Another way to make real good instant coffee.  And the "green mountain hot chocolate" that came with the machine.  This machine can do it all to include a cup of hot tea.
I'm on my second unit now.  I will never buy another product from this company since they do not stand behind their products.  They only make excuses and blame the consumer's home for their bad machines.  It's loud and they do not make a full cup of coffee.  It's a lot more work then it's worth and definitely not worth the price.
I like being able to buy a couple cups to try a new flavor.   One thing that I do not like about the B40 (do not know about other home units) is that the water pump is quite loud.   One thing I wish it had was an option to plumb it in (like some water filters).   Filling the tank after every fourth cup is not so bad, though.
  I have a Cuisinart and Mr.  Coffee at home, and both were under $100 ($80 and $30), and both still work.   I am looking into a Tassimo, which is made by Bosch.  I have few Bosch appliances and they are great.
machine is too expensive ,Keurig offers a better deal ,appreciate a great cup of coffee ,a big coffee drinker ,make real good instant coffee ,not make a full cup of coffee ,like being able to buy ,try a new flavor ,have few Bosch appliances ,
other home,more work,last months,real instant,loud cup,loud pump,few Bosch,second unit,new flavor,bad cup,
I went to get my coffee on my way out the door for work and found a horrible mess.   there was coffee all over the counter and floor.   There  was about 1 cup in the pot.   I cleaned up the mess and left with the tiny amount that the thing had produced.  When I got home from work I thoroughly cleaned the machine and tried again.   Same thing.
why would they design anything like this. i'm going back to my french press.
I received this coffee maker as a gift, which was purchased Nov '07.   It makes good coffee, but it always has a little water standing under the unit after each brewing.   Often coffee drips around carafe instead of into it.      I contacted customer service today about the problem and they said their records indicated the purchase date was in 2004.   Fortunately, I had the purchase receipt and faxed it to them to prove my 12 month warranty is still in effect.
The auto shut off is a good feature because I have forgot to shut the machine off on several occasions.  The clock and auto brew is easy to program.  One compliant is that the number of cups on the pot does not equal the number of cups you drink.  It's really a 2 to 1 ratio, two cups on the pot really equals one mug full.  I like the style of the coffee maker and how it operates so I hope it does not start leaking like others have stated.
The same goes for pouring the last ounce of coffee out.   The plastic collar that's around the top of the pot does not fit tight enough to drain or pour.  It's a nuisance.   It is also very hard to see water at water-line due to moisture that accumulates inside the viewing line.   After one month of use the pot cracked for no reason.   That was it for me.
However, since we always use bottled water we have yet to use this feature.  This, in my opinion, makes for a better cup of coffee.  My husband prefers the simpler programming of our previous Mr.  Coffee pot and prefers the digital look, rather than the analog look of this pot.  I on the other hand love the look on this pot.  However, we both agree it gives a great cup of hot, steaming coffee.
found a horrible mess ,has a little water ,a good feature ,auto brew is easy ,cups on the pot does not equal ,pouring the last ounce of coffee ,pot does not fit tight enough ,water-line due to moisture ,use bottled water ,prefers the digital look ,husband prefers the simpler programming ,gives a great cup ,
little water,fit pot,hard water,same ounce,good coffee,good feature,equal number,full mug,Same thing,simpler programming,
 We have no real criticisms of the quality of construction.   It is a good form factor for us as it does not dominate the countertop like larger coffee makers.   It does a good job, though not great, of making coffee.   It has all of the features we wanted including the thermal carafe that keeps the coffee from continuing to cook while it sits.
I had steel shavings in the carafe when I first got it so make sure to clean it well before use.     The carafe is not glass lined, so the coffee tastes like iron.     Everything about this screams cheap.
00 to replace a Hamilton Beach that had a broken carafe (could not find an insulated replacement) and did not keep accurate time.  It is only an 8-cup machine, so it may not be ideal for those who make large amounts of coffee.  Brewing time on my unit is approx.  7 minutes for a full 8-cup pot.  It features a digital timer/clock, so coffee can be made ahead of time and will be brewed at whatever time is set on the timer.  It is compact in size and takes up little room on my kitchen counter.
Coffee units.   Then you need to make sure you close the carafe lid tightly before brewing.     The carafe itself is a thermos-like container; it&#146s stainless steel on the outside, with glass inside.   This is supposed to keep the coffee hot even when the coffeemaker shuts off after brewing, and it does, sort of.
Regarding the machine, there are two holes placed on the rear where the water is housed.  I purchased a thermal carafe because I want my coffee to stay hot.   This machine does not keep your coffee hot for more that 1 hour which is unacceptable for a machine that will run you anywhere from $50-$75.   In my opinion, the way the cap screws off the carafe is a safety hazard.  You can easily burn your fingers if you are not careful when turning the cap to the pour position right after brewing a pot of coffee.
So far I have only made two pots of coffee with this maker, I purchased it at Meijer for $29.  I think it was a mistake on the price since the sign under the maker on the shelve indicated $59.     Its a great size for the counter, I am not a big drinker and the 8-cup insulated carafe is perfect.  As with the previous review, the lid to the water compartment is rather flimsy, but does the job and it brew's a pretty good cup of coffee.
wanted including the thermal carafe ,make sure to clean ,had a broken carafe ,not keep accurate time ,features a digital timer\/clock ,a thermos-like container ,purchased a thermal carafe ,unacceptable for a machine ,carafe is perfect ,not a big drinker ,pretty good cup of coffee ,
hot coffee,thermal carafe,flimsy compartment,good cup,sure carafe,more hour,great size,larger coffee,compact size,good form,
I've read several of the positive reviews on this coffee maker and am amazed that we are talking about the same machine.   The carafe is anything but spill-proof.   Everyone who has used it in our house has had difficulty not spilling coffee on the counter.   We've had this coffee maker for approximately two years and recently the temperature of the coffee has been inconsistent.   The brew-stop feature that allegedly allows you to pour coffee even during brewing never really worked.
The spout on the caraffe needs to be deeper, wider or something so that you do not spill so much coffee when pouring.   It's nearly impossible to pour when the pot is full without making a mess.     I've just learned that this coffee maker has been recalled in Canada, so I'm shopping for a new one.   (I assume it's recalled in the U.
Add water to the water tank, coffee grounds to the paper filter in the filter basket, and press ON.     The exterior of the coffee maker is a durable plastic, either black or white, and cleans easily with a damp cloth.     Any trouble with your KitchenAid coffee maker.   When you receive the new unit, just pack up the old one and send it right back.   Shipping is all prepaid for you.
A timer system on the front that tells you how long since the coffee has been brewed and after 120 min.  it  shuts itself off.         This is just a great coffee pot, but all great things always have a down side.   I have hard water.   Hard water and  this coffee pot do not mix.    The hard water clogs the little filter which means it needs to be replaced every few  weeks verse every 3 months.
I on the other hand think it also makes great tea.   I just fill up the maker with water like making coffee and add the tea bags to the carafe.  Then I  mix it with cold water and sugar.   Of course now, they have invented tea bags for cold water so I am going to have to try that out.
It's not expensive to add it, but it seems like a strange oversight in a machine that is overall well-thought-out.      All-in-all, though, it's a really durable little item.  We've had it for about 3 months now, and it's still cranking right along, happy as a clam.   We wash it periodically, and clean out it's innards once or twice a month, and it's been a good buy.
temperature of the coffee has been inconsistent ,not spill so much coffee ,pot is full ,coffee maker is a durable plastic ,receive the new unit ,have hard water ,water clogs the little filter ,replaced every few weeks ,makes great tea ,not expensive to add ,a really durable little item ,been a good buy ,
hard water,cold water,deeper something,good buy,impossible pot,much coffee,wider something,black plastic,damp cloth,overall machine,
I settled on the Black and Decker model because it was only $20. 88 at the local Wal-Mart.  The coffee maker has a digital clock, with programming to automatically start in the morning, also it has pause-to-serve as well as auto shut off. 88 I really do not think you can do a whole lot better.
Its easy to clean as well.     I had to replace the gold filter once and the pot broke (our fault) and I replaced that as well.   Other than that, a very high quality coffee maker.   I highly recommend it.
There is not enough room between the top of the coffee maker and the bottom of the cabinets to pour the water in using the carafe.   I have to slide the coffee maker out from under the cabinet to fill it.  Not a big deal, but, a front fill opening would simplify matters.     My biggest gripe may be just particular to mine.   If I put more than 6 cups of water in, the basket overflows, getting grounds in the carafe, on the countertop and just making a very large mess.   I have tried different brands of paper filters (store brand to Mr.
This starts the hassle.  The coffee basket is easy enough to remove and clean after a twist and lift, but getting it back on is tricky.  If you make the mistake of putting water in the brewer, you ca not tip the brewer back to see how to fit the basket back into the machine.  Be sure to put fresh coffee in before putting the water in, so you can wiggle or twist the basket back into place.
the water reservoir does not have the common little red ball that floats for the water level - I miss that.      The filter basket is a little unusual but I have not had any bad experiences with it.     When pouring the coffee into the cup there is an occasional drip on the counter but nothing major.
The timer function works great but if you "Sneak-A-Cup" before the pot is finished brewing it is like drinking coffee syrup.     Additionally, the basket is tricky to remove.   My husband, who does the dishes, curses it daily.   Removing the basket for cleaning is not a fun job.       I am sorry that I bought this piece of junk and even though it is only a few months old I am tossing it and buying a new one.
coffee maker has a digital clock ,do a whole lot ,easy to clean ,very high quality coffee maker ,have tried different brands of paper filters ,coffee basket is easy ,Be sure to put ,not have the common little red ball ,not had any bad experiences ,an occasional drip on the counter ,timer function works great ,basket is tricky to remove ,
red ball,better lot,more cups,front fill,unusual basket,biggest gripe,particular mine,sure coffee,Other quality,bad experiences,
This machine makes good, very hot coffee, and I've had no problem with the programing features.   The grounds even get into the water reservoir.     Many Cuisinart models have this same design problem.     Update after 7 months:  The brew process is slower, probably due to coffee residue build-up on the heating element.  Wipe-down seems to push coffee dirt back into the drip mechanism holes, and it's not possible to take apart for cleaning.
On the other hand, I am really pleased with the quality of coffee it produces.   The temperature of the coffee is for me just right, which is very hot.   In other words, just having a bottom heater works against you.   My philosophy is that fresh coffee is best within the first 20 minutes or so.
A feature one should not use .   How do you return the carafe to the burner .  )  What about the function knob.  Can one set the clock while coffee is brewing .  ) What direction must you turn the knob .    Found out the hard way that to reach the 6 o'clock position, one must rotate the Function Knob clockwise.
Well then .  BUY THIS COFFEE MAKER.      It does not have all the fancy timers etc.  BUT    It will make you a robust flavoured HOT coffee.
It has a poorly-designed water reservoir that is small and awkward to fill, and it is NOT A 12-CUP COFFEE MAKER, UNLESS YOU CALL 4-1/2 OUNCES A CUP.  (Sorry, I've accepted the "6-oz.  Cup" but a "4-1/2 Ounce Cup" is pushing it.   Next, they'll be calling it a 3-oz cup--but it wo not make it a cup, will it.         Also, the V-shaped filter basket can not stand on the counter for filling.
The heated water drops from the lid onto the grounds and the lid gets surprisingly dirty.  And the lid is hard to get clean.  I do not remember cleaning my old Braun coffee maker nearly as much as I try to clean this one.  The lid edges are also starting to discolor (the unit is white), I assume from the spray-back of the hot water onto the grounds.     The water level indicator on the side does not reflect the true level.
very hot coffee ,machine makes good ,Cuisinart models have this same design problem ,brew process is slower ,having a bottom heater ,has a poorly-designed water reservoir ,awkward to fill ,lid is hard to get ,unit is white ,
hot coffee,hard way,due coffee,first minutes,slower process,other words,possible cleaning,Sorry oz,Next oz,much maker,
I thought oh well I can still give as a late gift. lo and behold it shows up on my doorstep only a couple days later.  It was great that I could give it for a gift.  So, after giving it we decided to try it out.   Put water and coffee in and turned it on.   Man it heats up quick the whole pot was done in a maximum of 10 minutes.
  Water is difficult to pour in using the carafe and the little "gate" over the reservoir keeps wanting to escape and run free. On the power control panel there is the on button which is hit once for the get ready and twice for the go.   Get ready is the timer, Go is the brewing which will illuminate with a green light.   The AUTO light lets you know when the coffeemaker is set to start brewing when using the programmable timer.   The removable filter holder (#4 cone-style) has a rather flimsy bucket handle that pops out of place if mishandled.   Also, a cold storage which allows you to hide the outlet cord, which is purposely short as a safety feature.
I have one complaint and that is that when we first plugged it in it was already in the on switch and all of a sudden we heard burning.   DO NOT turn it on until everything is in place.   The plate heats up very quickly.   This was a very good coffee maker especially for this price.   I am more into the stainless steel carafes as they do not break as easily and keep the coffee warm for a longer period of time.
Our floater ball has sunk.  It no longer floats.  But this is not a huge problem because you can still see the water in this water level tube.  Overall, this is a good coffee pot and we have had it for over a year.  It is unfortunate that some of the cool features no longer work, but the coffee pot still works just fine.
I liked the nice sleek design of the silver & black machine.   Also, not being fully awake in the mornings, welcomed the easy-to-program coffee machine.     You can set the clock and program the timer quickly, and easily, and be smelling the coffee the next morning as you tumble out of bed. It Brews a full pot VERY FAST and you can stop the brewing process in mid-brew if needed, by simply pulling the glass pot out.
Hot coffee for me is not only an outstanding way to wake up in the morning; I savor the flavor of a great cup through out the day.     A friend recommended I try Gevalia&#146s 12 cup coffee maker with their coffee blends.  Being open to new experiences, I agreed and sent off for three different blends and their coffee maker.     The good:  This 12 cup coffee maker has an efficient and functional design which fit easily in a corner space on my counter top.   I chose the brushed stainless and black to fit with my stainless and black kitchen.  I found my morning coffee was brewed quickly &#150 without timing it, coffee seemed ready faster than with my previous coffee maker.
Water is difficult to pour ,using the programmable timer ,a very good coffee maker ,not a huge problem ,a good coffee pot ,welcomed the easy-to-program coffee machine ,Brews a full pot ,black to fit ,
good coffee,black kitchen,stainless kitchen,different blends,ready go,difficult Water,whole pot,Put water,flimsy bucket,good cup,
I owned this coffee maker for a little over a year.  Barring the poorly designed carafe, which leaked coffee everywhere but into the cup, it worked fine.  Then one day water suddenly started leaking from the back of it everytime I made a pot of coffee.  This continued even after numerous cleanings and tinkering with it.  I finally purchased a new Cuisonart 1150 after growing tired of cleaning up the messes.  I hope this coffee maker isnt as big a dissapointment too.
It was especially helpful to read the instructions for the espresso machine.  While making my first cappucino, I could not get the steamer to work properly.  After looking at the instructions again, I realized I did not have enough water in the steam reservoir.  Adding water quickly alleviated this problem. OVERALL USE:Some people have complained that the coffee maker is slow.  If you want fast coffee, why not go to Starbucks or McDonald's.
This was given to me as a gift.   I do like the dual capabilities of coffee/espresso, but the problem is with the coffee maker.   First off, the water reservoir leaks like crazy.  It is due to a very flimsy o-ring type seal.   Secondly, the decanter does not have a good lip so every time you pour a cup you wind up with coffee on the counter.
It is very slow when making simple pots of coffee and leaks water from the holding chamber.   When the coffee is finally ready to pour, it leaks from the spout.   We found this Mr.  Coffee maker not up to the normal standards of this brand.   And to make matters worse, after spending $70 on the product, Mr.  Coffee would not stand behind the product.
Used both the day i received it and both worked very well.   Only thing i had a problem with was frothing the milk after the brew cycle was done. ran out of steam early, but was easily fixed, by running just plain water through again and steamed milk during that cycle.   Not really a biggie.
I've had no problems with the espresso side and have found it does its job very well. read the manual and play with it and there is no problem.  Brewing is a tad slow compared with other machines but I can live with that because the end product is a very good cup of coffee.     The biggest negative. word of caution here. is the design of the coffee pot itself.
especially helpful to read ,have enough water in the steam reservoir ,coffee maker is slow ,very flimsy o-ring type seal ,have a good lip so every time ,making simple pots of coffee ,coffee is finally ready to pour ,a very good cup of coffee ,
good lip,slow pots,flimsy o,slow tad,good cup,other machines,first cappucino,helpful instructions,ready coffee,plain water,
I recently purchased a lousy Krups machine that prompted me to write an scathing epinion about Krups.  The good thing is, that experience brought me back to the old reliable Bodum which I had stopped using due to capacity needs when entertaining.    If you do not mind boiling enough water for two pots when serving more than eight people, then this is the system for you.  The coffee tastes wonderful, and cleanup is a snap.
For some reason, the water and/or coffee spills down the side when pouring.  So far this has happened every time we have used the machine - it is less than 3 weeks old.  Besides making a mess and being very aggravating, there is a very real potential for serious injury to the person pouring the hot coffee.  There is also a slight risk of electrical short if the machine is not constructed tightly.  We have tried every conceivable way of pouring - top on/off, slow/medium/fast pour rate, all combinations, etc.  - and have not been able to find a way to prevent this so now we just put a cloth down to catch the spill.
If you like stronger coffee, just let it steep longer.   Lower the plunger to the bottom and pour.   The plunger keeps the grounds at the bottom so that they do not pour out with your cup of coffee.     The decanter looks much nicer sitting on the counter top than a drip coffee maker does.   It is a little modern looking for my kitchen, but still looks nice.
We seem to go through them quicker than socks.   This could be due to the fact that we seem to have some adverse feelings toward spending more than twenty bucks.     Or it could be that I only use this one for tea.  That's right, tea.  I have my own special mix of teabags, brew a pot once a day, and am usually in business.
Lower the filter slowly by gently pressing on the lid&#146s black knob.  You can adjust the amount of coffee used and/or the steep time to adjust to your tastes.     The Bodum is adorable and looks great on your kitchen counter.   Because it&#146s not extremely popular here in the US &#150 at least not in Maryland &#150 it&#146s also a great conversation piece.
The clock and the lights come on but the rest of the appliance has shut down.      Although this appliance is only just over a year old, I have no intentions whatsoever of wasting money on postage or service.   I will purchase a different brand.      I am afraid it will be a long time, if ever, before I will consider purchasing another product with the Black and Decker label attached to it.
purchased a lousy Krups machine ,write an scathing epinion about Krups ,not mind boiling enough water ,coffee tastes wonderful ,person pouring the hot coffee ,able to find ,have some adverse feelings ,purchase a different brand ,a long time ,
much decanter,old weeks,old Bodum,modern kitchen,Lower filter,good thing,short machine,conceivable way,slow medium,black knob,
I loved the machine at first:  even though it is expensive and the kcups are expensive.      The kicker is this.   The pump stopped working.     I did 2 descalings, and it started working again.     It worked for about 2 weeks.   This morning.
I'm talking EVERY MORNING.   Since the day after Christmas I have not left my house for coffee.   It's so easy a zombie could make coffee.   Short of a good looking man-servant, it's the easiest way to get coffee in the morning that you had little to do with preparing.
This is the unit for anybody who wants an average cup of Joe from an exorbitantly priced brewing system.   The Keurig unit gives off a bone-jarring vibration as it refills its reservoir.   If you or anyone in the house likes those jolting morning alarms on clock radios, then you will love this.   Also have had several occasions when the volume of water dispensed varied considerably and resulted in hot water burns and a mess to be cleaned up.   Just suffered the last burn I intend to receive from this system and which motivated me to write this review.   I will rescue the old, reliable Black and Decker one cup brewer as soon as I close.
I can grab a cup of fresh coffee anytime and love it.   I usually make 2 small cups because it's more than one large cup and not too weak.   I like flavored coffee and my husband like STRONG coffee so we're both happy.   I use it a lot for just hot water too.   It's nice to be able to offer guests any flavor they want and regular vs.
a cup of coffee can be brewed instantly with absolutely no mess.  the unit is not inexpensive but it is worth every penny.  I turn my unit on and off daily rather than leaving it on continuously, and coffee is always hot and delicious.  My husband is big tea drinker, but he only drinks decaffeinated and they are not available in Kcups.
I did have some experience with the Keurig machines at the office, and was pleasantly surprised to see they have a home model.   As well, the ease of handling the K-cups as opposed to soggy pods after brewing was desirable.   I just want to push a button and be done.   The current selection of K-cups is more than adequate, although I do hope the selection of herbal teas expand, as I am a more frequent tea drinker.     Having had the machine for a week, I am more than satisfied.
kcups are expensive ,volume of water dispensed varied ,like flavored coffee ,just hot water ,able to offer guests any flavor ,worth every penny ,unit is not inexpensive ,coffee is always hot ,husband is big tea drinker ,not available in Kcups ,pods after brewing was desirable ,a more frequent tea drinker ,
more cup,expensive kcups,hot water,large cup,delicious coffee,easiest way,available Kcups,nice guests,flavored coffee,adequate cups,
Cuisinart needs to consider it's product testing.    The convenient burr grinder, however, does a decent job and the machine has three settings for coffee strength.    In my opinion, this is not enough to offset the shortcomings - especially coffee that is not hot.   Please, Cuisinart, improve the heating element and improve the pouring efficiency of the carafe - at the minimum.
I bought the 700 model last weekend after reading reviews of the model with the carafe (900 model I believe).  My old pot finally bit the dust and since I grind beans every day, I decided I'd rather buy an all-in-one machine this time.     The first thing I did was watch the short video on how to use the machine.  I popped the DVD into my laptop and had it playing while I unpacked and inspected the parts.  I ran a pot of fresh water through the machine as suggested and readied it for my first pot the next morning.      The instructions say to adjust the grind control for the number of cups you are brewing and the strength of coffee (mild, medium or strong).
It is almost impossible to clean the interior of this chute because it is inaccessible.   The combination of grinder and coffee maker &#147should&#148 make life easier and more convenient.   Instead, this machine requires elaborate efforts on a daily basis to clean out the chute and free up the grinder blades.     Electronics:  Something is wrong with the electronics on this particular coffee maker.
I did not use the grind feature every day, just mostly on weekends, for most of its short life.  The grinder ceased function in April, about 6 months of use.  She got hers about a year before me and from a different state.  Well, I took it back and they gave me an even exchange.  BBB could not have been better about it.
  I just rinse it out, no big deal.   The coffee is really hot, something I never had with the Melitta - actually burnt my tongue my first morning.   The coffee taste is better with this machine than the Melitta also.   The design on this product is nice and sleek, a little taller than what I expected but still fits under my cabinets.   I do have to pull it out to clean it but I had to do that with the Melitta too.   Also, pot does not turn off after an hour so you can have hot coffee longer.
   There is a more expensive thermal carafe version that utilizes an insulated opaque carafe rather than a glass one.  This version runs about $50 more and does not utilize a heating element to keep the coffee warm.  I prefer to see the coffee and would rather have it kept warm.       Overall, the DGB-700 delivers an upscale fresh cup of coffee that is worthy competition to restaurant ordered.
buy an all-in-one machine this time ,did was watch the short video ,almost impossible to clean ,machine requires elaborate efforts ,not use the grind feature every day ,coffee is really hot ,design on this product is nice ,have hot coffee ,a more expensive thermal carafe version ,delivers an upscale fresh cup of coffee ,
warm coffee,hot coffee,expensive carafe,last weekend,impossible interior,upscale cup,convenient life,free chute,particular coffee,most weekends,
oh I smelled the folgers alright all over my paper work. The design for this coffee maker releases coffee at an incredible pressure so it goes everywhere except in the pot. It just overflows everywhere. do not buy, unless that story sounds fun to you.
Ten minutes later I finished brewing a new pot of coffee confirming that the problem with my coffee maker was a faulty thermal fuse.   It is unfortunate that a $50 appliance is deemed unfixable by its manufacturer because of the failure of a $2 part.  DeLonghi has made poor decision in not standing behind its products.  DeLonghi should provide its customers information that might prevent unnecessary disposal of your fixable products in landfills.   DeLonghi define the lifetime of your product as 1 year which seems absurd my any measure of the word lifetime.
Has some nice features, but with a serious flaw in the design of the carafe.  I've owned two of them (I'm a slow learner) in the past ten months and the same problem occurred with each.  With regular use, a crack will form at the bottom of the handle causing the carafe to leak and risk breaking when full.  The top of the handle is poorly secured, while the bottom is attached to a metal band.
  I could just keep it under the cabinet at all times.   Unfortunately, after about one month, I, once again, had coffee leaking during brewing and spilling on to the burner.   When you lift the pot out to fill your cup, you now have coffee dripping onto your countertop.   I must use a wet rag to clean my coffee pot bottom and the inside of the warming element every time I brew a new pot.   I'm talking about a lot of coffee.   Maybe about 1/3 - 1/2 cup.
I bought this at Crate and Barrel in early 2009.  The first one was so loud, I took it back and exchanged it.  It worked great for a while, now it leaks a major puddle every time we brew a pot.  The lever/paddle thing in the back leaks/drips a lot of coffee-about a 1/2 cup gets on the hot plate and the counter.  This coffee maker is really annoying.
It's a mess and smells.  I think this machine also produces a lot of steam - it seems like there is nowhere for the steam to go.  Other coffee makers I've had have had holes somewhere in the water reservoir area above the fill line to let steam out.  The other day after the pot had brewed it bubbled and gurgled and steamed for several minutes after the brewing stopped.
finished brewing a new pot of coffee ,coffee maker was a faulty thermal fuse ,appliance is deemed unfixable ,prevent unnecessary disposal ,Has some nice features ,brew a new pot ,use a wet rag ,worked great for a while ,coffee maker is really annoying ,
new pot,nice features,absurd measure,slow learner,back leaks,poor decision,Other coffee,other day,past ten,incredible pressure,
  This brew station is perfect for that -- and it makes a perfect amount for one person.   Do not be fooled by the "6-cup" title -- it refers to those tiny little 5 oz.  cups that coffeemaker manufacturers try to convince you are REAL cups.   They are not.   This brewer brews approximately 30 ozs, which is enough for one full mug (my mugs are pretty big) plus about 3/4 of a mug for the second go-around.   It also makes the perfect amount to brew, sweeten, and put in my little 32 oz.
It takes about 5 minutes to brew. This model is programmable which is a handy feature.  Coffee brand filters were recommended. I bought this Brewstation from Walmart. Total cost was $32.
A relativley small footprint until you equate the sliding while dispenisng. The Hamilton Beach BrewStation does come with a digital, programmable clock with an automatic 2 hour shut off.   I was not interested in that feature so I did not try to program it and so can not comment on that aspect.  2 hours though does seem too large a window for a product that gets that hot.
Gets water on counter from opening the top after use.  You can hear the coffee being boiled after brewed.  Filter basket is difficult to get to trash with old filter without dripping everywhere.  Coffee gets cold very quickly if you shut off to stop the boiling.  Worst coffee maker I've ever owed.
Otherwise we do not drink much coffee at home.  Do not really need more than 6 cups for that purpose.  Should be perfect right.  Filled up the coffee container with the full 6-cups of water and poured it into the machine.
How does it actually work.   If it works good, really good, then it might be worth these other eccentricities.   Fill the tank, plug it in, turn it on.   The first squirts of water out of the spout measured 165 degrees.
brew station is perfect ,makes a perfect amount ,REAL cups ,mugs are pretty big ,makes the perfect amount ,model is programmable ,not interested in that feature ,Filter basket is difficult to get ,not drink much coffee at home ,
perfect amount,little oz,good eccentricities,automatic hour,perfect station,old filter,Total cost,more cups,large window,much coffee,
I appreciate a good cup of joe but I am not a domestic goddess and always felt somewhat inadequate in the coffee making process.   I broke at least 5 glass carafes in our first five years together.       So, when we remodeled the house I was looking for something that looked stylish and was "fool-proof" at making coffee.   Coffee addicted hubby insisted we try a thermal carafe vs.
Sorry, this coffeemaker is going back to the store where I purchased.   I have tried it for a few days and no matter what, the coffee is a little warmer than lukewarm.   It NEVER gets hot.   Maybe we just got a bad one.   Also with the lid on, you must push a small button to pour.
Make sure you fill only to the 10 cup level and make sure the coffee pot sits all the way back on the machine and you will have no problem.  I have a container that I have marked to 10 cups and use it to fill my coffee maker.  Remember if your maker is not level the front display can be off so level surface as much as possible.     This maker has been through Christmas with a houseful of coffee drinkers and it kept up just fine.  it is not as fast as my previous Bunn but the coffee taste better so it is worth it.
Water Filtration System ~ finally, the one feature that Mr.  Coffee is advertising the hardest on this line, but I really could have done without.   A water filtration disk is included that you place on top of your filter basket.   It supposedly filters out 97% of the chlorine in your brewing water.
- When the brewing is complete, hot liquid remains in the cavities.  When you pour the coffee, this 180F liquid often spills out of the lid and onto your feet.     - If you open the lid, the hot coffee can spill out of the lid and burn your fingers.     - To pour the coffee, you press a button on the lid and a second valve opens to let the coffee out.  However, if you you press the button too hard, the lid of the pot may unscrew itself and come off, pouring burning hot coffee all over the place.
  This happened with an old Mr.  Coffee I had before, but I thought that one was just old.   Now I think it's a design flaw. Even before the complete breakdown, this machine put out a large amount of steam that made me worry about the cabinets above it.   I would slide it out from under the cabinets, but the steam still drifted in that direction. The clock on it is extremely bright and lights up the whole kitchen at night.
appreciate a good cup of joe ,try a thermal carafe vs. Sorry ,push a small button ,make sure the coffee pot ,not level the front display ,off so level surface ,advertising the hardest on this line ,brewing is complete ,
hot coffee,sure Make,possible surface,good cup,old Mr.,bright lights,sure coffee,least glass,old Coffee,previous Bunn,
However, there IS a Pause N Serve feature, although I've never been that impatient.     I've found that this thing is not that hard to keep clean.  The filter basket is removable, so there's no need to handle a used filter, just dump everything into the trash by the filter basket.  This also makes cleaning the basket a cinch, just dunk it into some soapy water and give it a good scrubbing.  Same goes for the carafe, although I usually just give it a good rinsing each morning before I get the next pot underway.     Now for the important part: How does the coffee you just made taste.
Over the years we have gone through several Mr.  Coffee 4-cup coffeemakers and were pleased with the results.       The last time we traveled we chose a Mr.  Coffee 4-Cup Coffeemaker, Black to take with us.
Our addict gets a decent pot of coffee out of a full basket and he survives work.      And finally, by the fourth or fifth pot, things are looking good.  The coffee has some flavor and the plastic aftertaste is gone.     After that, almost miraculously, all is well.  Coffee consistently brews up a good pot of coffee and it does so quickly.  By the time his computer is ready to roll, at least two cups are brewed and life is good.
The swing-out filter holder is a really nice feature, and the grounds holder inside comes out for easy cleaning.  The coffee never seemed warm enough either.      Another plus with the Mr.  Coffee is that the coffee is nice and hot.  For the same price I paid for the B&D on eBay, I got a brand new Mr.  Coffee at Wal-Mart for $13 and some change.
The other great thing about the coffee maker is how easy it is to use and clean.   We actually bought instant coffee bags and just put them into the main tray without needing to use a filter.   Then, you just pour the water into the back, depending on how much coffee you want to make.   Turn on the heater and wait for the coffee.     Cleaning is a snap.   Just take the main tray out of the machine and dump the coffee bags into the trash, rinse the main tray and the coffee pot and you are done.
Since my husband has stopped drinking coffee and gone with tea, now I'm the only coffee drinker in the house.   We're using the large coffee maker mostly for his tea now, or when we have guests.   This little gem has been absolutely perfect.     ~ Product Description    Mr.  Coffee 4-Cup Coffee Maker has all the features of any larger coffee maker, yet features the smaller, 4-cup capacity.   I will never have another white coffee maker, because the staining is inevitable.
filter basket is removable ,get the next pot underway ,computer is ready to roll ,filter holder is a really nice feature ,bought instant coffee bags ,using the large coffee maker ,staining is inevitable ,have another white coffee maker ,
main tray,removable basket,fourth pot,nice feature,full basket,good things,enough coffee,good scrubbing,nice coffee,next pot,
so my great coffee maker will hitting the trash heap.   What a waste.  And customer service. forget about it.
After pot is done brewing it will beep few times to let you know.  It does have a drip lock if you are in a hurry and want to sneak a cup.      You can also fill this model ahead of the time and program it to start brewing at any time in the future 24 hours.  You can have it to make your coffee at the same the following day leaving the time as is and by hitting the Delay Brew again after filling it again.  This naturally requires you to keep your coffeemaker plugged in at all times.     If you like your coffee steaming hot you can adjust the Keep Warm button with easy to read + and - features.
Fits nice on counter and in tight spaces.  Very easy to use.  Just push a button.  Even programming is easy.  The carafe does not leak over when pouring.
This coffee maker is sleek in looks.  Fits nice on counter and in tight spaces.  Very easy to use.  Just push a button.  Even programming is easy.
The clock is a bright green which can be seen and one can read easily. Oster is made by the same company as Mr.  Coffee, Sunbeam and probably others.  I have other Oster products which also have never let me down.    I did not have to pay 300 dollars to get a good cup of coffee.  Two of my children have the same make, and one is over 3 years old and is going strong.
What a waste.  And customer service. forget about it.
Keep Warm button ,coffee steaming hot ,Fits nice on counter ,Very easy to use ,programming is easy ,Fits nice on counter ,Very easy to use ,programming is easy ,have other Oster products ,get a good cup of coffee ,
nice counter,easy programming,tight spaces,strong years,future hours,Warm button,other Oster,good cup,great coffee,bright clock,
I love this coffee maker, even though it is on the expensive side.   Coffee is plenty strong for my tastes.   The coffee really does stay hot and fresh for hours.     I want to give everyone considering this model clear warning though.   It is flimsy and plastic-y.   It is not solidly constructed, and most parts are "hand wash only".
The gasket on the basket cover comes off after the first use.   The engineering and manufacture of this device is terrible.   To make it worse, the customer service was horrible when I called Capresso.   I threw it out and bought a great Cuisinart Grinding brew machine.   It was $100 cheaper than the Capresso and a much better machine.   Do yourself a favor and do not buy the Capresso.
It took some reading and a few trials to get it to work (but my husband still has no idea how to make a cup of coffee in it. )    Unfortunately, I find that the coffee just does not taste good.   I have tried over 4 different brands and roasts and I just ca not get a good tasting cup of coffee out of this machine.   Honestly, I had better coffee from my Mr.
I used own a Cuisinart coffeemaker.   However, for Christmas my husband bought me this Capresso.   I ca not believe how much better coffee tastes.   I think the biggest impact was switching from a glass carafe to the thermal one.   It keeps the coffee hot and tasty for up to 3 hours.   I no longer have to dump out half a pot because of it burning on a hotplate.
After having a Cuisinart that brewed warm coffee and a Starbucks Barista that was just a little bit warmer, we were happy to find this Capresso.   I love the way it grinds the beans and automatically swings the filter basket into brewing position.  I also love the programming feature.   It's easy to use and looks nice on the counter.  It brews HOT coffee, and personal brewing preferences can be set.
You do have to carefully follow the instructions when assembling the brew basket and filter.   It&#146s not difficult and the instructions are very clear, but the process is not intuitive.   So if you don&#146t read the instructions you&#146ll likely do it wrong.       Also, you may be advised to buy Capresso's cleaning tablets.   These carry no instructions and were a dismal failure when I tried one.   You'd do better to buy a bottle of drip coffee maker cleaner at the supermarket.
bought a great Cuisinart Grinding brew machine ,much better machine ,brewed warm coffee ,easy to use ,looks nice on the counter ,process is not intuitive ,instructions are very clear ,do better to buy ,
better coffee,hot hours,first use,clear instructions,dismal failure,difficult instructions,great Cuisinart,much coffee,good tasting,strong tastes,
For the genre, it's a good looking and working unit, but does take a little getting used to.  The tabs on the water reservoir work well once you get the hang of them.  Likewise, you have to be sure to close the coffee basket all the way (you'll feel it click) and push the carafe all the way into the machine.  If you do not, it will overflow and make a mess.  (Yes, I learned this the hard way. ) The coffee is plenty hot enough for me and the carafe does a good job of keeping it warm for hours.
Later I watched as the filter basket popped open by itself.  That made the coffee miss the opening on the pot lid and start to leak onto the counter.   When the brewing was almost finished coffee started leaking from the top of the pot.  It seems that the 8-cup mark on the water container makes more than the 8-cup carafe can hold.   Finally, I took the temperature of the coffee.  It was 125 degrees.
This appliance is all form, with no function.  My first disappointment came after filling the removable water reservoir.  This takes a moment, during which the valve at the bottom makes just enough contact to spill water all over your countertop.     My next step was to add coffee grounds to the filter basket.  This could be especially hazardous if you set the appliance to brew while unattended.
Setting the reservoir in place without water spilling out the bottom is quite a trick.   One must work fast.     I too have had coffee spill out the top and had the basket swing open.   Coffee has worked its way into the electronics and presumably fried the brains of this machine.
It uses standard flat-bottom paper filters, or a very affordable permanent metal filter.  Coffee's impeccable reputation made it easy to spend the $49. 99 on this appliance.      Unfortunately, I was incredibly mistaken.
No questions asked.  (I had only requested a new lid in the e-mail. ) This support from them is the ONLY reason they are getting two stars instead of one.      Needless to say, I'll never trust this coffee maker to brew unattended ever again.  However, I was so pleased with Mr.
sure to close ,carafe does a good job ,coffee is plenty hot enough ,filter basket popped open ,mark on the water container makes more ,filling the removable water reservoir ,valve at the bottom makes just enough ,uses standard flat-bottom paper filters ,very affordable permanent metal filter ,easy to spend ,requested a new lid in the e-mail ,
hard way,little unit,unattended appliance,warm hours,next step,sure coffee,Needless coffee,good job,open basket,pleased Mr.,
After the lousy experience with the maker/chiller, I  should have insisted on a real coffee maker, but did not.   Now, I have been tortured for about 8 months by this counter-flooding, burn-threatening piece of garbage.   Operator be damned.          The problem is with the brewing basket, and with the weight of the handle on the carafe.
At first I thought It was my fault for not positioning the carafe or basket correctly.  The problem can be easily fixed by simply removing the lever.  This of course disables the sneak a cup feature.  B&D should recall the coffeemaker because users can burn their hands when pulling out the basket full of scalding hot coffee.     I like the water reservoir which is easily removed and filled at the sink, although it is not very ergonomic to hold.
I always wonder what ordinary people do with such poor instructions.  Once installed my wife hated the esthetics of the design and the difficulty in filling the horizontal water container.  She wanted me to return it but it was such and effort to install it I was not about to do that over again.  We will just  live with it.
We love both the mounting of the unit up off the counter and the convenience of the built-in timer to have coffee ready in the morning.     While the design is similar to prior models, installation is a bit harder on the new unit.   It does take some normal-handyman  style techniques to drill into the existing cabinet and mount the coffeemaker.   On this model, you mount the rear half of the top of the unit and the rest slides and locks into place.     Installation is made more difficult than prior models by a slightly more awkward holding arrangement for the nuts.     Our first unit did not keep time, and so the timer would trigger coffee making early; the clock gained about 8 minutes per hour.
  The new maker lasted about a month at which time, he got one more from customer service.   The last one lasted about four months until the heater kicked the bucket again.   Ultimately, he went back to his 8 dollar version which has been the saviour of the experience.   The spill-proof carafe worked great after the initial carafe was replaced.
Sorry folks, I hereby withdraw my recommendation for this product.     ORIGINAL REVIEW:  I went looking for another Spacemaker to replace the one I've had for several years.   My counter is small enough that I really was not willing to switch to a top-fill coffee pot.   This model lets me add water and coffee from the front.
scalding hot coffee ,not very ergonomic to hold ,difficulty in filling the horizontal water container ,design is similar ,Installation is made more difficult ,carafe worked great ,counter is small ,not willing to switch ,
new maker,full basket,awkward holding,ready coffee,horizontal water,last months,rear half,more holding,poor instructions,new unit,
Love the easy to clean parts, and you get a big bang for your bucks.   Very pleased with the product.   Excellent buy the day after Thanksgiving.
Our Mellitta (sp. ) that was a wedding gift was being held together by duct tape (latch broke - another review. ) so when I saw the phenomenal price at Kohl's, I had to get it.  Figured we ca not go wrong with a Cuisinart, right.
I did not bother.         While they worked, they made excellent coffee.  It was fun to have freshly ground coffee automatically.  The grinding function is very loud, so you do not want to have this appliance within earshot of your bedroom.
The only drawback to the machine is the cleaning every night, I really have not decided if that is such a drawback since I like the coffee so much.   If asked to purchase again - I  would purchase this machine.   I found the coffee bar on sale at Macy's for $100. 00 and at that price feel that is was a deal.   I have since seen it ranging from $125.
Everything is well designed and the result is a consistently good cup of coffee every time.   The only thing I do not like is cleaning the parts between cycles.   It's not going to make you late for work mind you, but it's tedious.   All-in-all though it is a wonderful machine that I would recommend to anyone looking for a grind & brew coffee maker at less than $100.
Otherwise, it has been a Timex.   I never tried it using pre-ground coffee, nor have I messed with the variable coffee aroma knob (seems like more of a gimmick).   Only reason to get a new machine is to get the brew pause function back.   Choice between another DGB-300 and the new DGB-500 will be tough.
saw the phenomenal price at Kohl ,not go wrong with a Cuisinart ,made excellent coffee ,have freshly ground coffee ,function is very loud ,consistently good cup of coffee every time ,a wonderful machine ,using pre-ground coffee ,get a new machine ,
tough DGB,more gimmick,less maker,excellent coffee,phenomenal price,only thing,big bang,good cup,variable coffee,wrong Cuisinart,
You can make one cup or two of coffee directly into travel mugs (with lids). )    Easy to put together, easy to take apart for cleaning, easy to use.   It's a good product.   In a small kitchen, this is a fantastic feature.
I should say that I bought my father one for Father's Day and he loves it too.   Oh well, I still love this Coffeemaker and it is perfect. like I said as my final recommendation at the top.  "why brew a whole pot when all you need is one or two cups. "  Buy this Coffeemaker.
There is no better way to start the day than a cup of coffee.   There is no quicker way to start your day with the perfect cup of coffee than this Cuisinart Coffee Maker.       My mornings are so busy, and I'm always rushing to get everyone out the door on time in the mornings.   Making myself a cup of coffee is something that I try to make time for as the hectic morning begins.   It's easy to make 1 cup or 2 with this coffee maker as you simply pour 1 or 2 cups of water in the maker to make the amount that you choose.   You can even leave the lid on the coffee cup while it brews to save even more time.
I tried the Melitta's mugs first, and felt drinking from the lids was good.  Then I tried the cuisinart's mug lids.  I never smacked on anything this hard for a while.   The cuisinart's lid has a smooth slant where the lid meets your top lip, whereas Melitta's is a right angle plastic piece.       Both coffeemakers make decent coffee, but I felt that the Cuisinart had slightly hotter coffee.
We have tried to get it out, but no luck.   We have tried different coffees, strengths, filters etc.   I do not think it is an electrical problem because the device seems to work perfectly otherwise.   The coffee maker is almost entirely plastic, including the lining of the cups.   Perhaps this is why this odor has been so hard to get rid of.   Would not recommend.
Using the Cuisinart TTG-500 3. 5-Cup Coffee Maker changed that quite a bit for me.     The Cuisinart TTG-500 3. 5-Cup Coffee Maker makes two thermos cups full of coffee.  You can use disposable paper filters small cone shaped ones.
easy to use ,a good product ,a fantastic feature ,brew a whole pot ,mornings are so busy ,save even more time ,lid has a smooth slant ,a right angle plastic piece ,Cuisinart had slightly hotter coffee ,coffeemakers make decent coffee ,an electrical problem because the device ,coffee maker is almost entirely plastic ,odor has been so hard to get ,use disposable paper filters ,
easy cleaning,small cone,whole pot,easy cup,right angle,more time,hectic morning,quicker way,hotter coffee,perfect Coffeemaker,
I read the first review of this product on epinions and the author's great review was the final deciding factor that this was the machine for me.   I then spent a lot of time searching for the best deal.   I found it on Ebay for sale by User ID rtdeli  or in his Ebay Store A-2-ZHomeCenter    It was Brand New $79. 95 Buy-it-Now plus $10 for shipping.   It shipped UPS Ground with insurance and tracking and I had it in 4 days.   I had this out of the box as soon as it arrived and put it through the "empty runs" necessary to flush the system.
Well, 2 points for DeLonghi - except this one only lasted a few days.  It's now coming up on two years and the 3rd machine is in the shop.  Delonghi still wo not give us our money back.  I'm wondering which of their assets they would do without for two years.  (other than their customer relations department).
It seemed like a good machine and DeLonghi is a standard of appliances in europe.     I won the bid for $42.     Postives:  The styling is decent compared to others we looked at.  The price on Ebay was great.      One thing to consider with removable tanks is how well the foot seals.
I received this machine as a birthday present less than a year ago.  It worked fine for the first six months or so.  It leaks like crazy from the outer edge of the filter basket- about two cups worth of water for a full pot.  I ca not figure it out- cleaning the machine did not change anything.  I have to put a cup tipped on an angle to catch the drips, or my counter would be a swimming pool.      I loved it when I first began using it- the espresso function works great, but I've grown tired of cleaning up after an inanimate object.
And, having worked in an Espresso shop before, I only like to work with quality machinery and equipment.   But, it must also make a decent shot.   Which it does.   Not only that, but the coffee side, appeals to those mornings that need just a couple cups of hot coffee.
This machine makes a nice tasting Espresso that you can control the strength of.   However, the frothing attachment just does not work.   It sprays steam and and dribbles hot water into the milk.   It appears to froth, but as soon as you remove the mild from the steam nozzle it immediately deflates to hot milk.   Would be fine if I wanted a latte, but I want my cappuccino maker to make cappuccino.
necessary to flush the system ,lasted a few days ,styling is decent ,price on Ebay was great ,present less than a year ,espresso function works great ,make a decent shot ,machine makes a nice tasting Espresso ,remove the mild from the steam nozzle ,
necessary runs,decent styling,outer edge,nice tasting,final factor,few days,tired object,empty runs,decent shot,removable tanks,
Have used it everyday for a month and may go back to grinding a weeks worth of coffee at a time.  It's a pain to clean the grinder, the filter and the pot every day.  This mixture gets onto the track for the filter basket and stops it from opening when you push the button and makes it hard to push it back in.  Otherwise, you need to stick the coffee maker under the faucet to rinse out the coffee goo .
I purchased the Grind & Brew thinking the more you spend the better the coffee.   Boy is this not so.   I struggled the last 3 weeks making a good pot of coffee and finally took it back today.
This is definitely not a coffee maker I would recommend to others.  The coffee it makes is OK, but the major issue surrounds the way the coffee grinder is integrated into the product.  This is due, at least in part, to the fact that the grinder sits right above the pot and heater.  I've seen other grind-and-brew machines where the grinder is off to the side, and I always wondered why.  Now I know.  So, if you love to clean frequently, this is your machine.
Got my Grind and Brew from an Ebay auction, then read the reviews.  We love fresh ground coffee and wanted something we could program to run automatically.     All the whining about cleaning etc.  What a crock.  The cleaning of the grinder and filter basket was easy and only took a few minutes.
(2) Coffee filter.   Upside - Comes w/ gold filter basket.   Downside - basket tends to pass fine coffee grounds.   Best to use paper filter.     (3) Water reservoir.   Upside - comes w/ a tiny carbon filter pouch.
Here's my own personal (and experience-biased) opinion of it.     1)  It makes good coffee, but not as good as its predecessor.   The older model had a brew strength control - the "new and improved" model does not.     2)  It makes just as much noise as the older model, so that part is a wash - no change.
hard to push ,weeks making a good pot of coffee ,'ve seen other grind-and-brew machines ,love fresh ground coffee ,filter basket was easy ,took a few minutes ,Comes w \/ gold filter basket ,pass fine coffee grounds ,Best to use paper filter ,w \/ a tiny carbon filter pouch ,
older model,tiny carbon,own experience,good coffee,new control,major issue,fine coffee,other grind,everyday month,better coffee,
Purchased the dc-2200 machine.  Only used on weekends but had it 4 years so 3 yr warr.  Was in my kitchen when it almost caught fire.  Called Cuisinart & they sent out the wrong item they said they would send.  We went out & bought the grind & brew cuzz we did not want the same model.  They sent me the same model so I called and even spoke with Clint (their superv.
The coffee comes out at about 195 degrees and stays hot on the plate.  The machine is easy to use and clean and brews in less than 10 minutes.  The disadvantages of the previous 1200 series model  have been addressed.  A definite upgrade.  I hope this review helps.
The lid does not fit securely on the carafe.  Cuisinart has sent me three of them so far and the last one fits better then the first but not really good.  I consider this a safety issue and I wish Cuisinart would fix it.      As far as performance it is as good as any I have had and I have had many.  It has nice look and is just the right height for the kitchen counter.
We received the coffee make for a housewarming present about a year ago.   The knob that controls the brewing/programming/auto start would not budge.   One had to hold a towel to the top back of the machine to prevent this.   We did not always remember to do this and I believe the water spilling down the back of the machine caused problems with the electrical performance.   The machine was shot in a little over a year.
But all of a sudden the programming has gone wacky.  It stops half way through.  Then sometimes comes on again.  There is no apparent logic to the performance.  But there are some mornings where it takes us half hour or more to coax a full pot.
It also provides double heating of the water, so coffee is burn-your-tongue hot.  There is also a knob for the programming of automatic functions- Auto On, Program, Clock, Brew and Auto Off.  This is a high technology machine; I'm surprised that it does not make a muffin as well as coffee.     To go along with the other capabilities, It has a carbon water filter in it to ensure the best water to make the best coffee.  There is a 30 seconds max brew pause when the pot is removed from the heater plate.
Purchased the dc-2200 machine ,not want the same model ,lid does not fit ,housewarming present about a year ,controls the brewing\/programming\/auto start ,programming has gone wacky ,coffee is burn-your-tongue hot ,provides double heating of the water ,a high technology machine ,ensure the best water ,
same model,surprised machine,good performance,electrical performance,better Cuisinart,easy machine,more hour,double heating,top back,good Cuisinart,
